This is Jocco podcast number 244 with echo Charles and me, Jocco Willink. Good evening,
echo. Good evening. And also joining me tonight is Mike Sarelli and George Randall.
And if you haven't listened to, when Mike came on the podcast for the first time, go listen to that.
It was number 134. Mike was in task in the bruiser in the battle of the body. And after that,
he did another nine combat deployments. And he is part of our leadership consultancy,
echelon front, where he also heads up our talent acquisition firm, which is called EF overwatch.
Mike, welcome back. And also George Randall, is an army vet, came up through the ranks from
enlisted to officer, which I guess we all have that in common. And then left the army for the
corporate world, where eventually we became a talent acquisition executive. That sounds impressive.
Always keeping a focus on recruiting veterans and coaching them through the transition
to civilian life. Now there's all kinds of things we could talk about. But today we're going
to focus on, well, it's been one of the focuses that we've had for several years at echelon front.
And it's a focus that you guys have taken and absolutely run with. And that is talent.
It is finding, recruiting, acquiring and retaining the best people.
Obviously, all those things are a subset of leadership. But it's a subset that both of you have
been focused on. And it's a subset that gets left out a lot in people ignore it. And
Mike, you, you, you started GFO Overwatch. And you guys got so possessed by this that you guys have
just written a book. And the book is called The Talent War. And you've done a great job of
covering, you know, this topic in the book. And I want to jump into it. And I'm going to do something
right now that might be considered lame. I don't know. I'm not 100% sure, but I'm going to start
with a quote from the book. But the quote that I'm going to start with from the book is a quote from me,
because I wrote the forward. So maybe that's lame. But here it is. Leadership is the most important
thing on the battlefield. And the most important thing in business and in life. It is leadership that
sets the example. It is leadership that makes decisions. It is leadership that unifies a team around
a common goal. And it is leadership that takes care of the team and gets the mission done. But
one of the most important roles of the leader is often overlooked. The responsibility of building
the team in the first place. The leader is responsible for training, equipping, and directing a team.
But before any of that is possible, the leader must recruit, screen, and acquire the right people
for the team. And that's a little bit from the forward. And then it jumps into this book that you
guys wrote. Before we jump into it, at what point did you start thinking that that we needed
right about this, that we needed to do something about this? Were you thinking about this as you
stood up, EFO Overwatch? As you guys started banging your heads together and moving forward with this,
Mike, at what point did you start looking at, hey, we need to start telling people about talent
and how they need to handle it as leaders? You know, I love how you just said it's a subset of
leadership. But absolutely, as you just said, it's one of the most overlooked parts is before you even
step out on an adventure. You got to formulate the team. And that's hard. And really,
Georgia and I nerd out on this, where other people are talking about, you know, just you too.
We're talking about talent acquisition. And if anyone calls me and nerd, I'll gladly provide
my address. You can come out of a conversation with me. No, I'm joking. So the amount of companies
we run into that reach out to us and say, hey, we need help. And, you know, we're very genuine.
We want to see our clients succeed. That's our primary goal. We also want to see our candidates
you know, prosper in those positions that we place them in. But they are at a loss
for what the correct steps are. And as we looked at it, it sort of out of frustration of wanting
to help them and them not always following our guidance, we during our conversations, we talked about
a lot about the special operations community and how it's taking them decades to create a world
class talent acquisition process. Do they call it something different? It's not hiring. We call
assessment and insolention. And so one day, I, you know, usually how I carry out my ideas. I was
probably watching TV and something came in my head. I picked up the phone called Jordan said, hey,
we should write a book on this. And he said, okay. And then we started researching it. You know,
we didn't think all the way through it. You know, most of my ideas are half baked. And, you know,
voila, we found somebody to assist us through the process because neither of us had written a book.
I knew two guys at Roto Book, I didn't reach out to him, which was probably the biggest mistake.
And we're learning a lot of that. The hard way, but this journey has been awesome. And it's
actually solidified and changed some of the views we have on talent going through this process and
all the interviews. So George, how did you two link up? Well, it was funny. I was actually listening
to podcast 134. And so I'm listening to this. And then you all mentioned, you have overwatch
in Austin. I'm like, you got to be kidding me. So I reached out to Mike Unlinkedin and I said, hey,
you know what? We need some world class leaders where I work. You know, and he wrote back
within minutes. And the next thing, you know, where it breakfast at Kirby Lane in Austin. And,
you know, it was like, wow, I found my counterpart. I got somebody who thinks about talent like I do.
And it rapidly took off from there. You know, ultimately leading to the wedding, which at some point
we might talk about. I didn't marry George. Let's just, there was no wedding. I'll let him continue.
He asked I was already spoken for. So, but yeah, and we just really started to think, okay,
how do we pair up my 20 years in talent acquisition in his 20 years in special operations? And
there was just so much synergy there in an instant. And we were fortunate to see it and take off with it.
Yeah, you know, from when Mike originally started talking to me and and late about, you know,
doing something with talent acquisition for people, it was such a no-brainer because all of these
companies we work with. We got to work with the company. We spent two days with them. And at the end,
you know what they say? They say, we would really love to have a couple people with your backgrounds.
Or, you know, do you know what we can find people? We were getting, we heard that for years and years
and years. Where can we get people that have this mindset, this leadership skill set? Where do we find them?
And you know, Nathan, I would kind of struggle as well. You can try and hire vets or whatever.
And then when Mike got on board and, you know, he just said, hey, we can actually do this because
your background with vetted. And it was, it was just such an obvious answer to help the clients that we
have at Escalafron be able to get good people. And on top of that, take veterans that are coming
out that have been institutionalized because I don't know if a better way to describe it because
I know I was damn sure institutionalized. You know, I spent my entire adult life in the
sealed teams had no idea. I'll tell people people would be like, you know, when you started
teaching leadership, like, how did you know it was going to work in the civilian world? I didn't,
I didn't. The first time I sat down with the CEO and I was talking to them, I had no idea
that almost never mind, almost that that line for line, the leadership that we talked to seals
was the exact same leadership that was needed in a company or in a team. And as soon as I realized
that, I said, we've got something very special here because we had distilled it down and it
made so much sense and he had been tested. As soon as got out in the civilian sector, same thing.
So when Mike started saying, hey, we could actually help the military folks and help the civilian
companies. I mean, this is just a win, win across the board. You know, you've got both sides
of the equation that absolutely benefit from doing this math and it doesn't get any better than that.
So to actually now jump into the book a little bit, kicks this off in chapter one,
you can't see talent. A Navy seal instructor told Dr. Josh Cotton. Tell me about Josh Cotton
before I think in here. So Josh is our counterpart, help with right the book. Josh and I connected
through multiple, multiple contacts of Josh's story is interesting. You know, you think Werner
Josh is the ultimate nerd and I give him a crap for that. He loves data. He's an industrial
organization on psychologist. Well, when he was finishing his doctorate, he worked with the Navy
out of Millington and eventually a contract came along where which was offered to him to work with
the Navy seals to assess how they assess and select talent into their community. So he also worked
with a little bit with the Mars community, the Arnold Army Special Operations Special Forces Community
and he gained experience that most doctors, I know, had a close psychologist, don't receive.
And then he took what he found based off assessing high performers, which arguably,
to special operations community is a bunch of high performers and how do you apply that to a business
setting? And it resonated extremely well. So as he stepped out of that contract, he stepped into the
Fortune 500 right now. You know, he's the director of talent assessments for a major Fortune
500 company throughout the organization. And so he's, you know, he's looking at all this data
at performers at different levels of the organization. And that's where he came into the book.
You know what that reminds me of. So at some point, I was talking to one of the guys that worked
at Buds as a civilian contractor, as what's the real word for an athletic trainer? Is it just
called an athletic trainer? Is that what it is? Is that the job, especially someone that
looks at your spring, Dankel or whatever? Is that what it is? Echo Charles? Trainer? Yeah.
Trainer? So I was talking to one of those guys and he was talking about
Patella for moral syndrome. So Patella for moral syndrome is this thing that you can get. And it's
where you're, you're, you're Patella, somehow, rubs against your, your femur or you're a
Patella tendon, rubs against your femur and it gets sore and swollen, right? And he said, you know,
in the civilian world at a football team, at a baseball team, at a college football team, whatever,
he says, you might see a case of Patella for moral syndrome. You might see three in a season.
He said, I see seven cases of Patella for moral syndrome, a date at Buds. So what I'm saying is,
you take this doctor that's used to looking at whatever, the assessment of some
civilian organization, we're going to assess some candidates and, you know, see what,
see where they're at and see where that mentally and see where that psychologically and
you have to wait for months and months to see how they actually perform when do they get put
under pressure at Buds? It's like, oh, here you go, here's a, here's a 180 people that are
about to get the biggest mental stress of their life in the next four weeks and you get to look at.
That's, that's, that's an amazing way to get to get experience. And that's what happened with these
guys that would, would athletic trainers. And it was a couple different approaches that guys would
have. Some guys would, they would leave like a pro sports team and and come to Buds and they
would never want to leave because they were so, so much help or they'd come and get all that
experience and then they'd go to a team because, you know, after you've seen hundreds of cases of
Patella for moral syndrome and ITB issues and whatever, all those little injuries that they deal
with all the time, they show up at a baseball team, they can identify things so much easier than
anybody else could. And so that's what it sounds like. This, this doctor cotton is. And to take
it one step further following that experience, he created something completely based off special
operations and how we classify, you know, high performers, it's called the elite performance
indicator of the EPI and he developed that personal assessment tool, which is now used by business
is and what we're going to be using sort of is our indexes, just one of many assessments of our
candidates for the EFO watch candidates that come to us from the military.
Bud, yeah. All right. So now that we've got Dr. Josh cotton, we know about him and so I'll
take it from the top. You can't see talent. A Navy SEAL instructor told Dr. Josh cotton,
it's not the biggest guy or the strongest or the fastest. You have to trust the process.
The process will reveal who has the potential to become a SEAL. Dr. Cotton was working with
the Navy SEAL community to improve their assessment and selection process. To that end,
he'd been asking all the instructors what do you look for in recruits. He had received a lot of
insightful answers. People who don't quit, team players who step up and lead, resiliency, people who
are calm under pressure, problem solvers. This was the first instructor who had taken their question
literally, but it was a good answer because you can't inherently see talent, not in somebody's physical
appearance and especially not on their resume. Now we go into this little case study, which is
interesting about this is people ask me, you know, like who's going to meet you? You think that
guy is going to make it? I've said, I have no idea because you can't tell. In fact, there was a guy
who was a captain and a great guy and he had never signed anyone off and said, this guy is going to
make it and he eventually got this candidate through whatever relationships he had, this candidate
came out, this guy was like a multi-language really diverse background, seemed like he had a bunch of
bunch of experience highly educated and he signed off on the guy and this is the one guy he signed off
of to be an officer in the sealed teams and the guy quit and he said, I'll never sign off and he
interviewed him. The whole line you had to go to the captain in the sealed teams. Signed off
on the guy, he quit, he said, I'll never sign off on anyone again. Now let's be honest, just
and start that way. When it was 25 year old, Jocca, you were like hey, that guy, as you watch all
of it, but I can't at lines up y'all. He played football in a D1 school, he's going to make it,
or any of that kid that did speech into debate, he's going to be gone within the first two weeks,
dude, in fact you say life humbles you, you still be learning, you don't know, you don't even
have to go to 25 year old, you're Jocca, you can go to 19 years old, as I'm watching guys that were
infinitely better qualified and you know, athletically more talented than me and I'm watching them
quit and I was like okay, I guess there's no telling who's going to get through this program
and speaking of which is the way you get to. Going back to the book, Mike embarrassly learned
this lesson firsthand when he was a student at going through Naval Special Warfare under water
demolition seal training, but Mike was a prior-listed recon Marine and by the way I'm talking
about Mike, Mike's really sitting right here. Mike was a prior-listed recon Marine, one of the
Marine Corps Special Operation capable forces which later became an official part of the Special
Operations Community in 2006 and Scouts Kniver in May of 2003, he was discharged as a sergeant
and commissioned as a Naval Officer and issued immediate orders to buds the Marines at taught him how
to lead a team and he foolishly and arrogantly believed that his natural, that this naturally led
to the ability to determine which candidates would make great seals and which candidates didn't
deserve to be there. His six months in buds would be a brutal lesson in humility on how wrong he
was and his ideas about evaluating candidates. How could he be in a position to determine who would
make great special operations soldier when he was competing for the very honor the other students
we're striving for. In this class Mike made the same class mistake that every business leader or
HR manager makes when they toss a resume into the trash because the candidate doesn't have the
exact education or industry experience required. Like most hiring managers today he judged a book
by its cover that book was Ryan Job. Ryan didn't look like a seal. He was on the heavier side
for a seal at least and nobody knew how he'd make it through the initial how he'd made it through
the initial physical standards to even get into buts. Mike looked at Ryan and he made a snap
judgment. This guy's not going to make it he thought. Mike wasn't the only one who thought so.
The rest of the class and the seal instructors all thought Ryan didn't fit the mold of the seal.
Since everybody expected Ryan to quit the instructors decided to speed the process along.
They threw everything they could at Ryan with within ethical and legal means of course
interesting note you made there. Of course interesting of course it was within ethical and legal
means buts is already among the most intensive physical and mental training a person can endure
and it was even harder for Ryan. The instructors made him run extra miles and do more pushups.
They forced him to be called let in Sandy longer than the rest of the students. By the end of
hell week approximately two months in retraining the class had gone from 250 students down to 35.
Recruit after recruit rang the bell three times signifying a DOR drop on request or
laments term they quit. Only 35 guys were left and Mike was one of them. He felt he was truly
part of an elite organization a brotherhood as he looked down the line of the physical
beast standing alongside him. He was astonished. A few candidates to his left stood none other than
Ryan Job who was smiling. Mike and Ryan both reported to seal team three they eventually
deployed to Ramadi. I rack where they fought in the battle of Ramadi in 2006 one of the fiercest
battles in the global war on terror. Ryan performed as an automatic weapons machine gunner during
the days in Ramadi. After months of fierce fighting Ryan was critically wounded during a major
operation in South Central Ramadi contested area held by alkai to forces. You shot in the face
by a sniper while laying down machine gun fire to cover a squad of seals closing on the enemy.
Days after Ryan was wounded doctors declared he would never recover his sight.
In salt to injury he also lost his sense of smell and taste but it didn't slow him down.
After his injury Ryan displayed the same drive and resiliency he demonstrated during his days at
buds. He refused to quit or feel sorry for himself. Despite all the setbacks he finished his
bachelor's in business with a 4.0 GPA he ascended the 14,411 feet of Mount Ranier and even shot
a and killed a trophy bull elk. All this without his sight, smell or taste.
Ryan underwent countless surgeries and rehabilitation in years after Ramadi. In 2009 only a few
weeks after he found out he and his wife his high school sweetheart would be having a baby. He
aspirated and died during his 22nd surgery for his injuries. He became what seals call the last
fatality of the battle of Ramadi. He was the third seal from his task unit to die.
Fellow seal Mark Lee was the first and the second Michael Montsourer who was awarded the
Medal of Honor for jumping on a grenade to save two seals, one of which was Mike Surelli.
It's hard for Mike to believe now that he ever doubted Ryan. He was always waiting for a time to
apologize and he found that time while they were in Ramadi. While they were in Ramadi.
After Mike apologized Ryan said it's okay everyone's been misreading me all my life.
So I don't know if there's a better example of why we can't judge a book by its cover than Ryan.
He ended up rolling into Charlie Patoon and tasked him to bruise her and he got some personal
love and encouragement from his Patumates to make sure that he was going to be an awesome seal.
But this is a metaphor for what you guys see in the civilian sector with people looking at
resumes and judging books by its cover. Same thing.
Every day, thousands upon thousands of resumes coming in, managers like,
this guy's been in our competitor, this person's done ABC, they have all these experience.
Yeah, got to hire him right away. No process. I just know it. Got call.
When everyone's talking to companies and I'll, a common question is what, what question should
you ask during an interview? It's a pretty common question or what assessment or what should we do?
How should we screen and I'm always saying, hey look, try and put the person in a position
or a situation that's as similar as they're going to be working in because that's the best way to
assess if they're going to be able to do it or not. It's a similar thing that they're doing now.
You know, for years, they're trying to figure out who is going to make it through seal training.
And now what they do is they send them to what is I think it's Chicago. They send them
Chicago and they go through a pre-training situation where what they do is basically freaking train
really, really hard and a bunch of people don't make it through that but then they find that, oh yeah,
more people that made it through that are going to make it through actual buds. Well, it's like,
does that not true? I've got to look at the numbers. I don't think it was a substantial increase
in the number that actually made it through buds. But again, we've got to go back and look at the
data. But it's the same thing with Dr. Cotton. And we see this with people who build assessments.
We've even, it's funny you brought up trainers for the screening for Jay Sock. There were physical
trainers that believed they could give you an 80% sort of answer on whether somebody was going to
make it through the training or not. Everyone claims, oh well, my personal assessment test will
give you 80% probability of whether a person will make it through the training. And it's all wrong.
That's what's the perfect question we need to answer in the interview. We hear that all the time.
There is no one perfect. There's no one perfect personal assessment. Some people like the
Hogan, other people like the disc. And what you're not going to find in this book is it's not
prescriptive. So I can be like, okay, step one. This is what you do. Step two, these are the questions
that you need to ask. These are the personal assessments that you use. It's different for every company.
What it is, you've got to identify your process. What's the process that works for you that
results in statistically the most quality hiders? And that is a, as you know, that is a decade long
pursuit and it's taking special operations. There's still redo. There's still constantly evolving
the process. 50 decades and they're still evolving that process. So yeah, you know, we hear it all
the time and somebody says this is the number one question I asked that determines whether somebody's
going to work at the company or not. And if that works, we're not here to judge that's great.
You know, we get people coming to us all the time saying, what are those questions? And I kind of
kind of off. Like, do you know what success looks like in your company? Yeah. They're already starting
down the interview path before they've determined what success looks like. What they're even looking
for. Exactly. What gaps do we have? What are we trying to do here? You know, and you know,
when I was coaching veterans and you know, Mike and I do this webinar. And I said, can any of you
tell me a time where you've left the wire and didn't clearly know what success looked like?
But do you watch people walk into the hiring process all the time? And they're like, okay,
here's a list of objective requirements. I want them to come from these companies. Okay, let's
figure out the interview questions. Yeah. Like you have a literally backwards. Yeah. So I guess this
is going back to what I was originally starting to say that I got sidetracked on. So when I asked
companies or people asked me, what's the question you ask? I always asked the group a question.
I'll say, who here has ever hired someone that did the best interview. It was outstanding. You
thought this guy was a rock star. You bring along board and they're told to disaster. And
100% of time every single person will raise their hand because everyone has done that. We, this guy
interviewed great, super-carol. She was terrific in the interview. All charismatic. They do a great job
in the interview and they're duds when they show up to work. And then I asked the opposing question,
which is, who here has looked, you needed to fill a sea, you took a risk on somebody. You
weren't really sure it would work out. They got in there and they crushed it. And the same thing,
everyone raises their hand. So it's a common problem and it's a common problem that we all have
where we think we know better than life. Yeah. And I got to tell you, you know, I've been doing
this 20 plus years and, you know, I worked for Fortune 50 Company one year. My team hired the team
that I led hired 23,000 people in one year. So I can say from a scale perspective that I probably
hired the more people than most on the planet. And I promise you, I've got to trust the process.
There's no part of me that goes, oh yeah, I got that down. I know that person, yeah, they're going to
rock it. No, no, that process. If you don't have a process and if you haven't defined success,
hiring will humble you. You know, and you've got to approach it. And you know, one of the things
that Mike and I went to great lengths about in this book was no process is perfect. And it's,
you know, and one of the big things where you're talking with Josh was, you know, how do you know
when you're doing it wrong? How do you get a feedback loop? And people just do hiring is something
mechanical. And they don't think about this. Oh, we got to go do this. So it's outsourced and
your HR is just okay, they're turning the cranks. And they're bringing people in the door. They're
funneling through resumes. Yeah. But even with my years of experience, you know, you know, I'm always
questioning myself. What am I missing? What have I missing? Did I get this right? Did I evaluate all the
right traits for success in this role? And you know, I'm still going to miss. And I'll get humbled by it
real quick. Every time I think I'm confident, Murphy's Law comes around and then humbles me click.
It's an art. It's an art. There's a science behind it, but ultimately much like you can study war
in the United States and train for a decade. But until you step into the arena of war,
you really don't hone that art. And so you're going to make mistakes. If you have a process
when we see the bad hires happen is when people deviate from that process and they put a time
women on it. And we're not taking it. We're not telling anyone that you're going to take six months to
interview somebody to hire for the job. No, we understand that it has to be within reasonable time
on it. But you know, I know we're probably going to get to this. You can have the greatest,
world's best talent acquisition process. You can have a great process. But if you don't have
your leadership foundation, if it's not solid within the organization, you're going to become
a revolving door for talent. You're going to get great people into the company and once they recognize
that there's bad leadership, they're going to leave. So funny enough, this book, and you know,
it's a subset. It's an important part of leadership. You actually have to start with your leadership
foundation before you even start to build a good hiring process. And that's where a lot of people
get it wrong. What we're lacking talent, let's just get good talent and good talent will come in.
And again, if you're working for a bad later, that person's going to leave. What do we always say?
You select a boss. Not a job. You select a great boss. Yeah. You say something in here too.
It's the same thing that you're saying. It will get to it later. But if you're hiring good people,
they don't put up with knuckleheads. They don't want to work for a knucklehead. So if you go on
you hire someone that's awesome and you're a knucklehead or your leadership is a bunch of knuckleheads,
they're not going to stay there. That's just the way it works. And the other thing is, you know,
there's, you're not just like combat, you're not going to eliminate all risk when you make a
hire. I mean, there's always going to be some level of risk there. But what you can do, if you
set up the right process is mitigate that risk as much as humanly possible. And then you end up
in a much better situation. Getting back to the book because damn, apparently we can all get sidetracked
pretty quick. I guess I can nerd out on talent too, huh? A little bit. You go into this section of
what is talent. At the most basic level talent equals high potential candidates. The people most
likely to become high performers. Talent is people like Ryan Job. It is the individual who never
gives up who performs in high pressure situations and who will win when others say it's impossible.
Talent drives the team forward and talent wins. And I'm skipping forward, which, by the way,
if this book, when I read it seems a little bit fragmented, just because I'm not reading the whole
thing, you have to buy the book to get all the information. But I'm going to skip ahead here.
Based on our research and interviews, we have identified nine core characteristics that
mark an individual as having high potential. Drive. The unrelenting need for achievement and
constant self improvement. Resiliency. The ability to persevere in the face of challenge and
bounce back from setbacks. Adaptability. The ability to adjust according to the situation,
learn new things, innovate and try new methods, humility. Self confidence in one's ability while
understanding that there's always room for improvement and that others experiences and knowledge
are valuable. Integrity and adherence to not only what is legal, but also what is right.
Effective intelligence, the ability to apply one's knowledge to real world scenarios,
team ability. The ability to function as part of a team placing the success of the whole above
the needs of the self. Curiosity, a desire to explore the unknown and question the status quo
in pursuit of better, more effective solutions. And the last one is emotional strength, a positive
attitude, high empathy, and control over one's own emotions, especially in chaotic,
stressful situations. These traits are heavily emphasized in special operations and explain
why many veterans go on to accomplish incredible things in the business world after their military
service. For instance, many companies including Johnson and Johnson with Alex Gorski FedEx,
with Fred Smith, Bridgewater, David McCormick, and 711 Joe Depinto to name a few are run by veterans.
These nine attributes are foundational to success no matter the industry. So when you say based on
our research and interviews, is this stuff that Dr. Cotton kind of put forward or where do you
guys come up with this? So it's combination of what Dr. Cotton sort of his discovery and then we
also went and we interviewed people that ran the assessment selection for these different communities.
Mar Sock, the Navy SEALs, the Green Berets. We worked with an amazing individual. His name is Brian Decker.
He was a lieutenant colonel. He was in charge of the special forces assessment and selection
process and actually sort of revolutionized it really around the concept of the whole man concept.
And so each of these communities have a set of core attributes they're looking for. And it
goes back really quickly. You did make a point about, you know, you hire somebody who interviews
extremely well and they end up not working out. And that's what we call personality versus
character. What you did was you hired based off personality and like ability and what is personality.
That's really your external sort of show to the world where characters the inner
attributes that drive your behaviors. And we say all fall in for that. It's like your customer facing
self versus your internal facing self. Exactly. And you know one of the things we we talk about in the
book is like the last thing you want to hire for. And then people get this, you know, this
culture fit. Are they a culture fit? And it sort of becomes this just ad hoc term they throw out
but they don't really understand. And when people say culture fit, a lot of times what they mean is
do I like this person. And what we talk about in the book is that some of the the most high
performing seals that I served with and you served with. I didn't like weird professionals and
worked well together. But when the job was done he went and hung out with his inner circle and I
went and hung with mine. But like ability for professionals is not a requirement. Now if you
guys just conflict and it creates a toxic culture that's a different thing but the least important
thing to me was like ability. If the individual performs and he can actually put his self needs
a side or her self needs a side for the common good of the team that's somebody that can be part of
the culture. As long as their values align with our culture. They're ethical. Yeah, I mean I think
here's the deal on that from my perspective. If there's someone that works hard and is there to
support the team, I like them. You know they like I don't know anyone that has here's the
interesting. I know people that have good personalities and bad character they exist but I don't
know of anyone. And so I might not like someone that has a good personality but you know and you
can think when I think of these people I just think of famous people. There's all these famous people
that they have these personalities and then they then all of a sudden the story breaks that they're
told their backs. And whatever they've got to most heinous things going on in their personal lives.
So you've got that where someone has a good personality they're they're forward facing
personalities who are positive but then behind closed doors they're scumbags.
And but if you flip that over I can't think of anybody that has a good character that they're
a good character but they're a bad but they have a bad personality. I don't it's hard for me to think
about. Now is there someone that maybe has a has a good character and there there maybe
two director or maybe they're maybe they don't talk a lot or you know whatever but but normally
if they've got a if they're he goes and check and they're they're gonna support the team.
I mean I can't. Yeah it's pretty rare. Yeah but a better way but is there were people that were
high performers that were just sort of socially awkward. So maybe they were just like they were too
direct. Right. It burned sometimes bridges you understood their personality but other people didn't.
Back to the attributes so Brian Decker is now the director of player development for the
Indianapolis cults and so took what he learned in special forces assessment selection he's now
applying it he's been in the NFL he's worked for for two teams for about six years.
When they revolutionized and you know it pains me to say this but I can put my ego aside.
The special forces army special forces community was much further ahead in terms of creating a
structured and professionalized assessment of how they select special forces soldiers into the
community. Seals it was just sort of this oral history passed down and when I went over there
as a guest instructor at their phase two which is their small unit training that's when I was
really exposed to their whole process and this thing called the whole man concept and the fact
that they were looking for specific attributes. So when they redesigned their their assessment
selection they created tasks much like an interview process where they're trying to elicit
certain behaviors whether good or bad and that's what they're looking for. And so that translates
to companies it doesn't matter you know what your interview process is or if you have written
tests what you're trying to elicit with every every question should have meaning behind it
in an interview process and ultimately that question has to drive at behaviors that's
and people call this you know in the civilian world behavioral interviews. They're one of the best
techniques if you do it well. Yeah the the German Army. Yeah as they were trying to get their
their officers to step up and implement decentralized command and be able to make moves.
One of the things that I've read about they would do is they would give them here's the rules
that you have to follow for this training operation and the only way that they could actually
successfully complete the mission would be to break the rules. And so it was a test to see if they
would break the rules in order to accomplish the mission. And then there was and look even if
if you didn't break the rules it didn't necessarily mean that you were a bad person. It just
would now we know more about you right now I know more about you and we got into some of this on
when it up at Gettysburg for you have battlefield. You know the fact that Lee didn't know his
his two subordinates as well as he had before Jackson died. So he's talking to you all and he's
telling you all that he wants to do something but he's not knowing well he doesn't know his personality
well enough. So when he tells you hey take that thing if you can't take that hill if you can and
you'll go to the other and says well I can't. He code of it just wouldn't have been a gut check.
And if you would have told Jackson to take that hill Jackson would have taken that hill. So these
are this idea behind setting up questions or situations or problems that you have to solve that
reveal some part of your character is a very cool thing. You know when you mentioned earlier about
when people come to you and ask what's the best interview question the question back to them is
how are you screening for character. And it's one of the things we go into this book is that
most of those questions are about experience. Do you have this objective experience? They're not
screening for character. And so you know with the research that we did with Dr. Justin Cotton brought
to us and when we figured these out you know our point is is that you know once you meet that simple
experiential gate when you've got the basics you need to start screening for character and you go
company by company by company and and I and I hate in some ways to say this because I see it all the time
which is executives are almost the worst of this picking other executives and they don't screen
for character they're looking for it. Did you work at the competition? How did you move the revenue?
How did you improve customer success? How did you move a product along? They don't go down into
character and I sat in the interview after interview after interview and it and it's all objective
traits or you know basic subjective traits that don't go deep into character and that's what's missing.
People will default to objective things because they're measurable. They're easy. It's the easy
button. The subjective is what's hard. He talked about defining success. You know one of the
mistakes we see with company students they just have one interview process across the organization.
You actually have to create talent profiles for each of the roles and functions in levels of
and that's why it takes a lot of time. So what's going to make a great engineer in a company
is vastly different from what makes a great salesperson. So a lot of the times
why companies don't define success and they're not good at the interview process is they haven't
take the time to create talent profiles for the different levels and the different functions
within the community. It's much like a seal. The attributes that make a great seal are vastly different
than the attributes for special operations direct support in Intel officer or someone handling the logistics.
And we've gotten smarter about that over the years as well. And what a lot of people don't understand
is we're not only screening the green berets and the Navy seals or also screening the people
that provide the support to those organizations that ultimately come under our umbrella. They're
being screened for specific attributes as well. Think about the attributes of a good point man versus
a good breacher. Right? This is like two guys in the same food but you know that breacher attitude
versus a point man attitude. That's even those guys are a little bit different and they kind of
get picked when you show up at the team. You know some little guy that's sneaky point man.
Some big freaking bruiser walking around breacher. So let me throw this out. You often see that
bachelor's degree is a requirement and a lot of companies can articulate that. Yeah why?
Why is that even a requirement? In a not saying it you know it does show somebody took the
the initiative to go complete their bachelor's degree or a master's and I understand that but
he's got a great story about when C++ programming came along and I'll let him tell it
but yeah just embarrassing for the people that were requesting a coder. Yeah I had it. It was
actually Python was the language that they were coding in and I had a senior engineer come to
me and say hey George you gotta go find me somebody with five years of Python experience.
I'm like whoa we can't do that. He's like well why not?
He said it's only been around three years and you might have not knocked that requirement back
down to three but it's scary that he was so wired to getting an objective level of experience that
he didn't relate to the job and was completely arbitrary and wasn't timed any measure of success.
So I mean we calibrated him really quickly we got somebody that had spent most of their you know
the last few years doing Python you know coding but you know working with that language but it
was shocking that it came from an engineer. Yeah you gotta watch out for that one.
Going back to the book the importance of a talent mindset and this is this is sort of a thread
that goes throughout the book. A talent mindset is the deep belief that human capital is the single
most important competitive advantage your company can have. When a company has talent mindset
assessing, selecting and developing the best talent is a top priority. A talent mindset not only
accounts for hiring talented people but also includes the continual development and investment
in that talent through their tenure in the organization. So beyond just bringing people on board it's
continuing to grow them and make them better. So we call the high potential. When you're going through
the interview process to select new seals in when they graduate buds are they had performers?
They're not yet. They haven't been proven. They they passed the first gate. That gate is closed.
They are high potentials. So even if you're looking for a frontline trooper frontline employee or a
brand new CEO when you bring them into the organization. If you made that decision that they're going
to be part of the team even if that he's been a prior CEO in another company he's a high potential
within that new organization. He's not proven yet. So in order to turn that person from a high
potential I mean this this is what we do for a living in national unfrient. Now you have to
develop them and that takes a lot of time and effort and it never stops. And if you want to turn
that high potential into a high performer it's again it's you have to pour in and invest in those
people and that's why special operations was sort of the the foundational organization we focused
on in this book because they do it so well. At the core of what you know makes special operations
so special it's their fundamental belief that people are everything and of course when we say
people you're also talking about leadership. And then you know you look it's one of the things we
drive through in the book that Talon mindset is that everything changes so rapidly today. Technology
the economy markets companies you're only true competitive advantage is talent and that's what we're
trying to convey is that it isn't the hardware in special operations it's the people and and that's
how it's got to be in corporate America and it's got to be where you treat your human capital with
the same rigor and the same focus that you treat your financial capital. And time and again Mike
and I see that you know of course revenue, here's all people are focused on revenue they're not
focused on the human capital which is driving everything. You get into this section chapter two what's
so wrong with traditional hiring practices. George Feld has if you'd want a lottery for a career
through a highly selective veteran hiring group you just been offered a position at one of the
world's largest big box retailers according to the company representative they were looking for
driven leaders who know new how to mentor lead and provide vision for people. Sounded like the
perfect fit for George plus the job included good salary stock options and growth opportunity.
It was George's first civilian job after nearly a decade of active duty service and we'd
set him up to be able to go anywhere and do anything. George accepted the job his very first day of
orientation training and onboarding was like a punch in the gut. Nothing was about talent or
leadership. The position was none of the things they'd advertised or told him they didn't want
a leader they wanted someone who'd fill vacant positions as quickly as possible with people who
did hear strictly to the rules they were looking for cogs and a machine not talent. Accordingly
their recruiting teams were evaluated based on efficiency their speed of filling vacant roles and
cost per hire. To say it was a bad fit was a gross understatement nevertheless George soon proved
himself to be a high performer and was promoted. His new role still wasn't a good fit fit so we applied
for another position within the company he felt he would be more suitable. Despite exceeding all
this key performance indicators and being ranked in the top 5% of his divisional employees the company
refused to move him. He was succeeding in a leadership role that others struggled with so the
company wanted to keep him there. George made it 20 months before he quit. He wasn't the only one who
had to leave quickly. Several peers who shared his talent mindset let also left within two years.
George and his peers had been able to transform and improve their small assigned corners of the
company but as soon as they left everything reverted back to the status quo. A tradition went up
and all the KPIs went unmet. George learned a lot of valuable lessons from that big box retailer
primarily in what not to do which can be as important to knowing what to do. There was a first hand
look at how broken traditional talent acquisition is. The mistakes this organization made are the
same ones we see companies make again and again. And here they are lacking a talent mindset not
understanding how HR should be structured to drive impact, having a butts and seats mentality,
participating in fear-based hiring and settling for mediocrity. Anyone of these mistakes
and spelled disaster foreign organization but the most destructive mistake is missing the talent mindset.
Rough first tour out of the military huh? It was. It was and you know I've got a four-year
old my wife's pregnant when I'm thinking okay I've had a great career. The things that made me
successful in the military they're going to make me successful in the corporate world and I'm just
fired up. You know young don't know what I don't know and use one of those veteran firms and
oh I landed job. You know what I think is interesting about that is I bet that many people here
oh you've got a guy that's been in the military for 10 years. What he wants and what he expects
this is someone that doesn't it hasn't been in the military what he wants and what he expects is
to be told what to do and then follow the protocol as has been as you're told and staying your box
and anyone that's in the bend in the military knows that that's not how the military operates
at least that's not how it should operate. So you go into that position they think oh cool we've got a
cog here that we can just count on to you know run the numbers whatever follow the daily program
when in reality what does a military individual want to do wants to improve things wants to make
things better wants to grow wants to get more efficient wants to want to push and improve that's what we
want to do and all of a sudden you're trapped in a situation where no don't do that. Oh yeah I was
sitting there and you walk in the first day and I'm like what happened what did I miss how did I
miss this you the other thing they wanted rule followers you know this is a big box retail or
we won't we go to great likes we do not name any of these companies but I walk in the door
everybody would know this one and they're expecting me to execute very specific rules I mean
it they had a more manuals for the same task than the United States Army does it was it was
phenomenal and that's impressive that's very impressive how you pull that off you want to know how to
do something there's a there's a binder up there and you know this is this is before everything
you know on on your iPads and on your computer and they wanted rule followers and immediately
I knew that was wrong because to your point the one thing that I would add is you know military
people come out want to win they want to make a difference they want to make an impact and so when
you're looking at a company and you know you see this this big name and I got to be honest another
way I got humbled was those stock options looked really really good when I came out I'm like
who I've got equity I got something I would never get otherwise but they want to rule followers and
and so there was no there were no latitude you know when I work my commanders you know everybody
I work with they give me my left and right limits but they also entrust me to make good solid
decisions that take care by people if I need to exceed that left and right limit and I communicate
those things but I got here and it's literally you're in a really really small box and you you go
from thinking that you're going to be wildly successful and to be honest with you I was because I don't
care what you're going to throw at me I'm going to figure it out and and and I did but it was just
missing so many things and veterans crave being able to make you were just making a difference
of the service now you want to make a difference in the corporate world and you know I was kind
of almost ashamed to come back tell my wife honey I think I made a mistake you know when she's
even it's pregnant that was not coming out of my mouth you know I was just like okay I got to
figure this stuff out but yeah bad fit yeah and just to make sure I clarify this point
to say that military people we're not saying that military people are not rule followers
correct and look in the military you follow all kinds of rules from the way you cut your hair
to the way you've freaking wear your clothing like you follow rules but there's there's another
level of this and as a leader the last thing I look I as a leader I wanted people that followed
rules and here's the key point as long as the rules made sense and the rules didn't make sense
I wanted my guys to come to me and say hey you know what jockel this thing that we're supposed to be
doing it doesn't make any sense and here's why I don't want people that blindly follow rules that
don't make sense if there's rules in place there's a good reason for them absolutely military guys are
great military guys and men and women are great at taking a protocol and exercising that
protocol and we have the discipline to and the mindset to get that done but what's even more important
than that is having the mind to look at a problem look at a situation look at a protocol and say
wait a second we can make this better we can do this more efficiently that's what that's not only
what we do but it's what we want to do do what drives us because like you said we want to win
yeah and you want to and you know and and and Mike and I try to do this with each other and you
want to empower the people that work for you that you're leading to do the very same thing
to say hey you've got a good idea and I brought a phrase from the two of you the best idea
wins you come up with an idea it makes sense you know it's not illegal it's not a moral it's not
an ethical and it's going to drive revenue or improve something hey let's get after let's go do it
I came up with an idea that I figured out in one year would do two million dollars in operating
cost reduction and the answer was is it in the book like well no and neither is the two million
dollars by the way and it was still no and and you know that's kind of the environment where
military leader goes okay I'm not going to reach my potential here I'm not going to be able to do
all the things that I want to do and and you know it was challenged because you know I don't want to
quit anything but you sometimes have to make those hard decisions in your career to say yeah
I could impact better somewhere else and I did this supports something that I tell people all the time
that the most important compensation you can give a human being is freedom and autonomy and
and what that means is ownership ownership over your own destiny and if people like that's a
classic example here you were you're getting good money you had good stock options you're crushing
the job which means it's not like it's a tax on your mental power but none of that was compare another
that none of that was had enough value to make you stay there exactly whereas if you were to had
autonomy and freedom and the ability to control your own fate and destiny you'd still be there
right now we wouldn't be having this conversation you'd be running the company yeah exactly
and you know it's spot on and I came into a company two years ago and then I concertally
named the company force point which is a room by Raytheon but a cybersecurity company and
that's what the CEO and the CHRO gave me at that company and what's interesting is we put an
ethos a marker in the ground for the entire team it was teamwork ownership humility
turned around the entire I mean we walked into a dumpster fire frankly so when we walked into
and we were able to do great things but that that value in that ownership that they gave me
that I was able to give everybody on my team it's everything and so when you come into this
moment's reconciliation becomes an issue that value that empowerment that ownership you give
people they stick and in two years we had zero percent attrition wow is that you know what's
amazing though is that that's a surprise to people and you know I'm kind of sitting back going how can
that be so so much of a surprise that giving somebody ownership and trust and value is everything
the most important thing the best form of compensation and the reason I've been able to tell
that to clients at Ashland front is I say look I had people that you knew in the Sealteams
in the military in the Navy if you're doing the best job you know three times better than anyone
else in your opportunity I can't give you a raise okay like I can give you a good evaluation and then
in two years you'll be eligible for promotion and then you'll get an extra $270 a month no one's
doing three acts to work because of that but what can you give someone freedom and if you worked
for me and you were square away you pretty much did whatever you wanted to do and then and I would just
do nothing but provide cover fire for you if you weren't square away is a totally different
ballgame you're going to put in a box and you weren't going to be able to maneuver at all because
you're doing things wrong so the best way to retain your talent is great leadership and it goes
back to bufre we just did he have battlefield the guysburg you know he operated within the spirit
of the commanders intent and actually deviated from what was the plan because he saw an opportunity
I think what the Marine Corps calls it took authority on demand and made calls that ultimately made the
union army you know victorious over the the Confederates you know you did say something about
and we deal with this with you have a watch is for some companies it's a mental leap
to hire a military leader into a senior management role when they're coming fresh out of the military
and it's usually because of those perceptions are shaped by what the movies
100% the water you guys I mean you follow orders that it's 100% the cogs in the wheel
is shaped by movies and we literally have that conversation you know especially during COVID
we've seen that a lot of organizations did not select the right leaders coming in the
organization that were not able to innovate in the depth that were not able to handle the chaos
could not remain calm and we're unable or ill-equipped for crisis and what we have to educate
them about these men and women coming out is you know one they are generalists but generalists are
much more powerful than specialists in fact one of the quotes from Brian Decker in this is that
we've over specialized some of the roles in the private sector it's no longer good enough that
you're an ear doctor you now have to be a left ear doctor and you know while I understand that
that is requirement for certain roles if it's a very technical position yes technical skills are
required but in general management roles which are usually your top leadership roles in a company
generalists are more equipped to lead and this is why because they they draw from a broader base
of experiences I mean you've been all run around the world in the military you've dealt with
different cultures you've dealt with different problems such you have this vast array of experiences
where a lot of the the business leaders that have never left the United States do not
and we're finding that that that that experience has not only prepared them but it's the
fact that there are a lot of these military that are stepping into the roles the ones we place
are being highly successful they're performing when they step in of course there's a learning curve
but the learning agility for the the men and women that we place is extremely high that's one of the
things we're screening for Eddie if I've watched is that yeah into intellectual horsepower matters
it does but once that gates closed these people are placed and it's it's been phenomenal I mean
you met something the the clients at the eF battlefield they're like the best higher ever
yeah the the train ability you know if you've been in the military you know how to learn
you start learning stuff out of the gate and you learn how to learn very well and so that's why
when someone comes without the skill set in the civilian sector they can learn that skill set very
quickly because they've been learning all these different skill sets for eight years 12 years 20
years 25 years that's what we do in the military it's a new stuff all the time going here section
called the cost of talent when companies lack a talent mindset it's a common refrain cost creating
a robust talent acquisition and management process is simply too costly they say what most
companies don't understand is the major cost is not money but time and devotion to creating a
world class talent acquisition pipeline in the process you will actually save money in the long run
as your tuition lowers and you consistently make better hires the special operations community
has long understood that people are everything special operations soldiers go through three main stages
assessment and selection training and combat and war and then you guys break this out so in special
operations it's called assessment and selection in business it's called talent acquisition
or the hiring process and special operations it's called training in business it's called talent
management and leadership development and then in special operations called combat and war
and in business it's called business sales marketing production whatever is that you're doing it's a
pretty good little break out there of how similar these things really are going in another section
here may companies have a fundamental misalignment between upper leadership and HR where leadership says
they want talent but HR is not set up to actually hire for talent in fact HR often doesn't even
know what talent looks like in the company there's no gold standard of talent instead hiring
is mechanical order taking process based on objective requirements leadership gives HR a laundry list of
what they want years of experience required skill set compensation range and HR goes out and fills the
order to have effective talent acquisition your business leaders and HR department must be strategic
partners the talent acquisition team must be students of the business understanding the organizations
underlying goals and talent needed to achieve them since day one in my career Joe DePento told us
and that's the CEO of 711 I've always had my CHRO linked at the hip and will continue to
as Joe is discovered to function strategically your HR department must be a part of the planning
process for both talent acquisition and management HR should be involved in succession planning
and gap analysis to assess select and develop talent in a strategic way you know we
we found this you know I kind of knew it intuitively and I suspected it but when we did the research
chief human resource officers are often paid one third of their C-suite counterparts that's where it
starts could you imagine for a second that your your mechanics and your medics were paid a third
of what you make because they're not frontline could you imagine what that would look like in
special operations in any military unit and that's where it starts and and HR is not a strategic
function and you know I had the benefit of coming up with this mentor and somebody who really
empowered me in her name is Tracy Kio and she is the CHRO of Heal of Packard and she's just absolutely
amazing you know we put this quote in the book because to this day it's still it's one of the reasons
that I've stated my function for so long and she went to an executive meeting one day and they're like
hey you know Tracy it's good to have HR at the table she kind of sneaker'd look back to them and
she's she is a very strong leader and she says we are the table and I was like you know what that's
that's right and that's the theme throughout this book is the people or everything so when you
start out deprioratizing your chief human resources officer and you make this an administrative
function or an operational function you know how do you ever expect to get the best talent and talents
which are having your product talents what's driving your service talents in front of your
customers talent is driving your revenue that's everything and then you sit there and you look at
your revenue and your revenues declining your traditions high your products not on time and you're
going to go on gee I wonder what's going on and it it it it takes Mike and I about all of two seconds
to to see that and it's unfortunate and one of the things that we really wanted to get across is
you can really leverage HR in a strategic function and it makes all the difference to every single
part of your business and the more of a talent mindset you have and the more that you empower
human resources to be your strategic talent partner that revenue will come that product will be
on time that service will be good it's it's not rocket science but in some places it's a brand
in concept let's go back to that cost so there's there's an old attitude you can't outspend
a good hiring process yeah because the consequences of having a poor hiring process can sink
a company one of the statistics we found is that for senior level executive positions
the cost of a bad senior leader can be 213% of that individual's annual salary so giving
example if there you have a 300 thousand dollar salary CEO or executive that could cost the company is
highest 639 thousand that's let's say that's a direct cost so what a lot of companies can't
track from a tuition is really the the indirect cost and that's about two thirds of the cost of
a tuition you can't put a number on the damage to a culture that a senior leader can cost
maybe for two years that impacts sales and that's what's very hard for a lot of companies because
they can't see it on their bottom line directly good CEOs can come hang out to national
on front and go work with some clients and you you'll get to see that all the time
toxic leader a bad leader a leader with a negative attitude everyone below them either doesn't
perform well or leaves if they're good and you know it is the good people as we said earlier the
good people leave the bad people stay there and don't perform well that's what happens
on their bad leader it's total nightmare what would see a little I think Henry Ford is
credited with this quote they're at a board meeting and they were talking about leadership
development and somebody said hey well what if we develop our people in they leave and Henry
Ford looked at all them said what if we don't and they stay this is why leadership development
matters so as you're reading that that section right there you saw George and I getting like
agitated we get we I mean this is how passionate we are this subject so through echelon front
I spoke with a HR group there was like 500 HR leaders from an area we did it it was supposed to
be in person conference code and so it was on mine but I had like 100 HR leaders reach out they
were just fired up because I talked about the book like you guys are the key to the success
of every organization don't let your leaders tell you otherwise so you know Tracey Kio and
Paddy McCor you know Paddy McCor was the CHRO for Netflix built a strong organization both
these wait what's Netflix yeah both these ladies should be CEOs of any Fortune 500 company
they just have a passion for talent acquisition in talent management or leadership development and
I mean you look at Tracey Kio Harvard educated cutter teeth and sales and marketing and was
asked at one point during the career hey we've got a problem with you know HR can you go fix it
of course answer was no they said good you got it and she developed a passion your HR leader
has to be a business leader they have to and HR even though I love HR sometimes has become a
dumping ground for average or mediocre performers and most often those HR leaders are just
compliance leaders they're not a strategic function so if your HR reports into legal it's a compliance
function if they report into finance it's an overhead function but as Tracey Kio will tell you
if they report into the CEO and have a direct line and they're involved in the talent strategy
then there's a chance in hell there's strategic function that is going to help build the organization
into a world class organization and so that's where that misalignment between senior leaders in HR
is killing a lot of organizations because back to the talent mindset yeah that's a big that's a big
change actually it's not even that big of a change it's a little change that will have a huge impact
you start getting people to really start to grow the or grow an organization properly with the
right people that's exactly what you're talking about you go into this section here I'm skipping
ahead this section here that I liked it's it's entitled fear based hiring special operations
community has become world class model for potential based hiring which is their foundation of
their assessment and selection process in contrast many companies instead of hiring the candidates
with the most potential higher those candidates that inspire the least amount of fear
this kind of fear based hiring usually comes down to one of three fallacies number one red flags
are more important than green flags number two leaders shouldn't be outshined by their followers
and number three somebody's better than nobody you go on in traditional corporate hiring practices
the objective has seemingly shift from higher the best to higher the familiar and safe people are
more afraid of a bad higher than they are excited by a good higher you go on here fear based hiring
is dogmatic about objective requirements you guys already talked about this black and white
criteria make it easy to say yes or no does this person have ex years of industry experience does
this person have wide degree these criteria don't matter nearly as much as you might think
the ten-conylbrient decor former commander of army special forces assessment selection told us
when I arrived in my command anything easily measured was heavily weighted in the selection process
the problem was it didn't have a lot of predictive value the same is true in business
just because you can measure something doesn't mean it's important and just because you can't
measure something doesn't mean it's not important the only question that truly matters is does
this person have the potential to be a top performer don't disregard red flags entirely but don't
obsess over them either in combat you don't want to get shot but at the same time if you're
primary concern is not getting shot then you don't go into battle if you make your hiring
decision based on avoiding your worst case scenario you'll never achieve your best case scenario
it's far more effective to look for green flags than for red flags oh people are scared
you know and and and and and I don't want to get too far down into the minutia but if you're
a manager and you've got an empty seat so many people that I've seen over 20 years are like
I'm going to lose that seat if I don't get it filled with somebody I'm going to get somebody in there
so anybody is better than somebody then they go down the objective requirements like well they
don't have this they don't have this and so they're checking off red flags of objective requirements
to put somebody roll and never asking the question is this the person with the character
attributes that can do the job they're not looking they're they're literally scared well
if I hire this person and oh they don't have five years how am I going to be looked at what
if they don't do as well as I think and they don't they don't think that their leadership can
take somebody with the right characteristics two or three years less experience than they
mark and put them in the role and and and coach him to succeed they're they're scared to death
they want it it just turns into this machine how fast how fast can you hire how fast can you get
that butt in the seat I'll take that step further at the risk of being a little bit of a
stereo typing people but who's hungrier the person that you know has two years experience going
into a role that needs five years experience or wait will you know or the person that has seven
years experience going into a role with five years experience required who's who's hungrier
who's trying to prove themselves a little bit more I don't know man I'm going to be in
Georgia to hear hungry individual that wants to prove themselves and and and I've seen this time
and again is you know the recruiters that I've brought up to town acquisition specialist I call
them talent consultants because they're really embedded in the business they'll go
have talked with this guy yeah they're two or three years lied on the experience you were asking
for I promise you this hungry they're hungry they want it they want to get after it
and the manager says well they don't have the seven years of experience and it goes back to
what Brian Decker said you know they picked seven years almost out of the year that seven years
is not predictive of success working for a competitor is not predictive of success
character attributes are predictive and you need to be watching for those check
another fear but fear-based hiring problem leaders shouldn't be outshined by the followers
average or underperforming managers often fear hiring someone who outshined them because they
don't want to hire themselves out of a job there should never be a maximum standard for talent
only a minimum if you're not hiring people better than your current employees you'll never
raise the bar for talent within your organization that's just the classic surround yourself with
people better better than you I want to work myself out of a job I want to have and we go in
a little bit later about succession planning I need to have as many people who can take my
place and corporate mercados and do that you know the succession planning we do in the military
to muscle memory but I always want people who are going to push me to be a better leader they're
going to push me to get better at my game to up the game I mean when you roll with people do you
roll with people that are easy to beat sometimes
something I can't I might want this this toxic environment right now it's here for an hour
it's waiting for a moment that's the first moment for echo Charles to shine yeah sometimes I do
roll with people that are easier a lot easier you do somebody's better than nobody and you you
know you talked about that just feeling like we better get someone in the platoon and you know
this happened in in Charlie Ptun life had a guy a good guy but he just wasn't really didn't
really have the just couldn't get the job done and you know coach and we wrote about it in
dichotomy and leadership but one of the things that I told Laef I said hey Laef if you get rid
of this guy you're not getting another one I mean there's there's you know you're going to go
on deployment you're just with missing a guy and because we're going to we're going to get rid of
and you know Laef was like well and he thought about it he said you know what I think we're
better off without him and you know that to me that was a little litness test for me because you know
Laef might be thinking hey I'll just replace him with some other guy and we'll you know we'll
step it up it was a litness test for me to see what Laef really was thinking and if you really
would rather not take someone that means you don't feel comfortable with him at all so there's a quote
from Charlie Beckwith for the listeners Charlie Beckwith is the founder of Delta Force you know
surf time with the SAS which generated the idea for for a specialized force yet a quote that was
I'd rather go down the river with seven studs than 100 shitheads and it goes to point that
yeah I'd rather select highly talented people into the organization and have less people
than you know falling quantity is not better than quality never has been and you know the the quote
from her kill her your clippers the Greek philosopher 500 BC about the 100 soldiers on the
on the battlefield 80 or sorry 80 or just targets tend to even deserve to be there and then there's
10 that are warriors but that one that one will always bring us home I mean these guys all talked about
the the importance of talent and you'd rather bring talent people in individually
then build a massive quick army that's when you deviate from the process it works out poorly for you
yeah when you bring the wrong person in you're actually just creating more drain on your time
just mayhem yeah mayhem and then it's a cancer and then your A players are looking at you going
why do you bring a sea player in and now it reflects on you as the leader that your bar
wasn't high enough the your standards weren't high enough that you were tolerating this sea player
this be player and we all don't have that works out and never ever well
next section what makes special operations so special and in here you you kind of profile
one individual an individual by the name of Johnny Kim which podcast 2021 you can listen
Johnny Kim's story it's it's just unbelievable what what made you want to profile Johnny in here
so Johnny and I and Ryan were all in the same but class and what stuck out about Johnny now
it goes back to why I was judging Ryan you got to understand my career prior to that I'd finished
number one in pretty much every military school from boot camp in school of infantry
finished third and recon school out of thirty behind two guys that went on to be Marzokde at one
even you know graduate number one from Reno CS so when you're on a successful track what
what happens you become a little bit arrogant you think you have things figured out and I thought
I had things figured out naturally because I was still a sergeant in the Marine Corps the class
sort of gravitated towards me because I had a rough neck style of leadership and they loved it and
the instructors loved it as well but Johnny I just sort of always dismissed Johnny because small
Asian kid Korean from LA just you know he's sort of I don't want to say devoid of emotion
he's not he's not a showy guy and naturally because he didn't have a flame buoyant personality
I figured out the sketches not performed it he's just another one of the the students that
he was going to drop or go make it through and be a non-factor in the sealed teams
in this book I think you're seeing that I show my ass a lot in these assumptions that I made about
you know who's going to be a good seal and who wasn't and you know usually that was wrong
but those are the scars as you get involved in town acquisition it is like you don't
become better at this process of assessing and selecting the right people in your organization
unless you screw up yeah I'd say your assessment was wrong
on multiple levels because not only is Johnny Kim an awesome seal and ranks you know above
among the highest of you know respect in the seal teams but then just as a human I mean then
as a Harvard doctor and then as an astronaut and then just basically as an overall human being
he's right up there with very rare fire there so I talked to Johnny what I you know I wanted to
get approved through NASA that he was good he read you know I think the instructors looked
Johnny and they just sort of you made a snap of judge judgment you know he's just quite
little guy and watching him because again we both reported in the sealed team three my job
just continued to drop because he was better than I was was day one out of Buds I mean he was just
that smart where he picked up everything quickly you know 18 delta now he's a high speed medic
quickly rushed to sniper school becomes a sniper you know you either be treating
casualties on the battlefield or he'd be pulling the trigger eliminating Islamic
extremists and the guy was amazing and humbled to to to have served with him and
based off his podcast we had a very close conversation about one night in the soccer city
which you know was a bad night for everyone but ultimately that was on stone or an eye
that we even let the guys go out when we knew we weren't ready but yeah it's the the point with
Johnny's a lot of people just would have looked past him quickly because you know he didn't have
college degree from LA nothing stood out on paper because you you want you know peel that on you back
yeah I think I think a good word to describe Johnny that you would pick up is just unassuming right
he's just I think he just she's just unassuming and he that's what he is I mean it's it's
less now because you kind of people know his background now so I'm sure that just comes across
but it's super just a super humble on the unassuming guy and yeah uh a beast now I tell people
I worked with Johnny Kim you know I start with Johnny Kim that's awesome
the origins of the soft talent minds at the very core of soft is a talent mindset the idea
that small group of talented individuals can be effective fighting force capable of defeating
larger enemy forces in delivering strict strategic impacts through skull small scale operations
three innate traits of lead spot special operations talent mindset and subsequent success one
no one has prior special operations experience so raw talent must be the selection criteria
the most effective selection is based on mindset and character that's a crazy thing to think about
that when you go into special operations they're most of the time there's zero experience
in special operations you know that's just that's like a crazy thing to think about
where does that seal come from he comes from a high school you know this is the story you know
we're working with business leaders and they think they need to experience it so important I
say hey I don't go to a high school and say hey we're recruiting for Navy SEALS raise a hand if you
have special operations experience don't it guys you did you know it was your bowl hate French foreign
Legion the UK special forces go get some experience come back and uh and then let us know
uh next one special operations for since our teams teams win not individuals number three special
operations teams work in high stakes environments when the stakes are high mediocrity is unacceptable
let's look more closely at these traits raw talent this is this is no emphasis on experience
raw talent is difficult to identify industry experience on the other hand is far easier to identify
and measure this is why business world often falls in the bad habit of overaligning on industry
experience and as a hiring criterion special operations does not have that luxury because nobody has
prior special operations experience if the soft community began selecting for industry experience
the US would not have a special operations community out of necessity special operations had
to develop a core competency in potential based hiring where raw talent is the primary consideration
that's self-explanatory next one team mentality special operations forces are structured as teams they
are incentivized as teams and they win or lose as teams not as individuals in contrast in the
biz world in the business world the egos can often rule and the team can be less and emphasized
people are rewarded for individual achievements so individuals are often concerned only about
their incentives versus the overall health of the organization bad leaders who hire and manage
others often accept and often and even encourage mediocre employees because it raises their own value
in comparison a team mentality greatly reduces the power of ego yeah there's nothing worse than
encouraging mediocre people to be in your organization so that you can look good
does you have something on that Mike?
I do let me hit back on the lack of industry experience to real vignette so again we quoted
Charlie Beckwith if you didn't know it because we also interviewed what we didn't interview
Charlie Beckwith because he's passed but we did interview throughout this book a guy named
General Jerry Boykin amazing individual was a long time dealt a forced memory even the commander
was involved in desert one operation the equal claw so you know we went into the history
Charlie Beckwith was a strong believer that before you could even get into special operations
and this was the old sort of mentality that that that existed within the military that you have to
serve as a conventional soldier either an officer and listed before you could try out for special
operations and he was very dogmatic about that and General Boykin talked about when the
Army Special Forces community created the 18 X-ray program because of the needs of the war where they
took people directly off the street that had the right attributes past the initial tests intelligence
physical standards mental standards that they actually made as good of special forces soldiers
if not better because they didn't have bad habits from the conventional forces that was one of you
so let's put that into a private sector you know context the other vignette google did a
study on what made their most successful managers so successful they they they they came up with
ten criterion that made them so highly successful industry experience came in a number number nine
it was one of the the least important things now if you look at extreme ownership pretty much all
these principles of how we lead were much farther ahead than the importance of extreme I'm sorry
the industry experience so that's why this potential based hiring is so much more powerful than
objective trivial requirements like industry experience when when they started the 18 X when did they do that
I want to say that was roughly around 2003 2004 that that program came to revolution
I'd have to go back and find the exact year yeah John strike reminder was talking about that
and how there was like people in the special forces community that were saying all this is
garbage you're gonna get these guys that don't know what they're doing but like so many of those
sag operators went right from boot camp to you know to a it and then on the special force
and then they went right over to Vietnam and freaking just got after he he like was laughing about it
because those guys were just freaking legit what with general boikom was telling the story you know
you had senior leaders when he was the commander of use to sock which is he's the commander of
all army special operations and they were arguing there's two camps of no we can't accept people
without conventional infantry experience and the other camp was hey know we can take people off
the street and turn them into great special forces soldiers and of course what there is a command
soldier major use to sock sitting back the senior and listed visor wall both camps fought
and finally he said when he piped in he said hey I was an OJT soldier in Vietnam I didn't go to
the special forces qualification course they sent me right over to uh to to Vietnam and I learned
the job well outside in the wire and they all shut up and you said okay there you go
right uh last thing high stakes perhaps more than any other factor the high stakes under which
the soft operators under which soft operates necessitate a talent mindset war and combat are among
the most unforgiving environments in the world on the stake on the battlefield can mean the
difference between life and death not only for oneself but for ones fellow soldiers a failed
mission can mean the destruction of cities and the loss of civilian life excellence and execution
is the standard because it has to be the stakes are that high it should be no difference in bit
different in business in business the risk may not be life or death but the stakes are incredibly
high don't fool yourself businesses war war by nonviolent means the result of a bad hire or
several bad hires is the underperformance of the business if not a nose dive to bankruptcy it is
not literal death but it is death in the marketplace that death spells disaster for you and your
employees whose well-being depends on the health of your organization look at today covid hit us
for those people that have these attributes as leaders they'll factor there's like okay hey that's
part of the environment we got to operate in let's go do it all right hey let's you know let's
prioritize what we got to pay attention to how do we pay attention to our people how do we pay
attention to our product how do we continue to drive the revenue and take care of our people
and it and it was it just didn't phase those people and I've been around quite a few of them
were it was like okay yeah we got covid okay and what's your point but you can start to see
those companies where that talent wasn't there where that talent mindset where that leadership
wasn't there covid hits they lose their minds what did they do let's start cutting people let's
cut this let's cut this immediately we'll we're going through today speaks exactly to
why it's so critical to have a talent mindset and get people with those character attributes
in the roles that make a difference and and and I love but you guys have pointed out earlier
the US military is in the most powerful force in the world it's the US economy and that was one of
the things we wanted to do with this book was to we want to continue to contribute to strengthen that
you go into a skip and ahead a little bit you go into a scenario and it just it just spells out
exactly what you're talking about you got a guy Daniel you go into this Daniel's looking to
hire candidates for sales leadership position and he used two search firms EF Overwatch which is
what which is excellent front and a competitor and Jeremy so this is here's the two people
that got presented Jeremy presented by a competitive search firm 3.9 GPA from a prestigious
university high intelligence four years of industry experience with two different companies
driven highly competent borderline arrogant Chris presented by EF Overwatch 3.2 GPA from a
public university above average intelligence faced significant adversity in life came from a
lower middle class family and held a full-time job on college recently separated army infantry
officer who held several different functional billets in the army has all the attributes
are required to be a highly successful sales leader but lacks industry experience which of these
candidates would you choose since this chapter is about hiring for character in scale you might know
the answer is most likely Chris not Jeremy but be honest at your company which one of these
candidates would most likely be hired that's a good question when you put be honest in front of it
because right because it's a fear-based hire is to go you know what we don't know about this
Chris guy he seems like a good guy using the army but man Jeremy he's got four years of experience
you go on most companies would choose Jeremy without hesitation Chris's GPA was average
compares to Jeremy's but he didn't have the industry specific experience but he was one of those
people who perform time and time again whatever you put in front of him you'd find a way through it
over it or around it he was relentless and adaptable so you go on they they have eventually chose
Jeremy over Chris and two weeks later the guy calls up and says we made a huge mistake
that's how it turns out that click that click time and time again it and here's the funny thing is
you remember tray holder who helped us out during the infancy of if ever watched we had this call
and it was either we can have to two weeks after they made that selection and this leader within
the company who we had a personal relationship said hey this guy is an arrogant you know what he's
like we've got a problem and you know we're not going to say hey we told you so the guy he's trying
to run a major distribution center he made a call we're there to support him and our basic
question was well do you want to talk to our candidate he said no and said we asked what what are you
going to do about it he said nothing and I just asked him was said if you have some of the
that you feel is going to poison the culture why aren't you going to do anything and it was if I
get let him go two weeks into the job my senior leaders are going to look at me like what are you
doing down there and so that individual was going to let it ride I haven't talked to him I don't
know if that individual stayed and sometimes things changed within four you know a few weeks maybe
that that individual who was arrogant came around but uh well you think the chances of that are
very well it's but how often it and let's you know we talked a lot about special operations
and how great of an organization is how great they are selecting high potentials but how often
if we're being honest with ourselves did we let mediocracy rain within the seal teams yeah I
mean you need you need people and what what was horrible you know I didn't mind that look you
you got to have people that are going to do some of the jobs that are a little bit easier in the
teams I mean it's just the reality the situation and you know when I was going through officer candidate
school I had whatever 80 people in my class in my officer candidate class I was the class president
and you got to write like suggestions to the drill instructor and or whatever so I guess a group of
people like four or five people because I had a bunch of prior and listed guys in my class all great
guys and and female as well there's guys and girls in there and somebody wrote to the the drill instructor
and said we need to get rid of these four people they don't belong they don't belong as officers
in the Navy and so my drill instructor whose name was gunnery sergeant seals oddly enough great guy
you know as you know I mean any Marine Corps drill instructors just freaking out standing so he
gets up and he says hey I'll tell you what let's say we get rid of the bottom 10% of this class
and he says now what happens tomorrow we got a new bottom 10% what happens after that we got a new
bottom 10% so eventually realize you can guess what there's going to be a bell curve in any
organization where I have a problem with this so so that's my explanation like hey the seal teams
look you're gonna have some guys that are not the not long ball hitters you know you're gonna have
some guys that are not long ball hitters the problem I have and and had and still have
is when you take those guys and you put them in the leadership positions that's where it's a problem
that's where it's a real problem in my book and we still love that to happen yeah it happened we
still love that to happen because hey they've put in their time they've earned that spot you that's
not a good criteria first off I'm gonna say you guys have a suggestion box in Navy officer
candid school yeah it wasn't really a suggestion box I don't I don't that's why I couldn't really
name what it was but it was some way of communicating with the drone structure I don't I forget what
it was because I didn't do it but because I'm just gonna say it Marine Corps officer candid school
that was called the trash can and the drone structures did not care you was a suggestion to you
I don't know I don't know where I don't know where this idea came from I'm thinking to must have
been some kind of suggestion box or maybe they raised their hands and asked him I don't know
but it was it was the reason I remember it it was somehow clandestine right they weren't they didn't
say in the middle of a class like because we used to basically get briefed all the time saying
in the hallways the barracks you know you'd all say it out front of your rooms you're all in big
lines so no one had the courage to say hey officer candid Smith Jones and and brown need to be
let go no one had the courage to that so they somehow through some mechanism and I get your humor
through some mechanism they they got to the to the drone structure and yeah I don't know what
that mechanism was but no the the navy officer candid school was pretty good to go I thought
how did good time we we so we actually one of the candidates to came to you if ever watch
fighter pilot actually was going through the training because we hold webinars every Friday
both in leadership and then career search and struck a quarter of this guy he actually moved
to Austin he's like hey just just so you know I went to officer candid school with with Chaka
with willing yeah he's like that guy saw later so you bring up a point that again we nerd out on this
yeah all talent follows a bell curve or normal distribution curve and you know that that is a
fundamental truth however the performance within that talent distribution is more like a I'm sorry
the the the performance is more along lines of a power distribution or some people call it the
paradeo principle it's just 80% of the results driven within your organization come from 20% of the
workforce that's that's it's just the realities as you say but ultimately what makes better
organizations and as we did the research is that competing companies within the industry all have
that bell curve it's you want the average performance of your entire workforce the statistical mean
to be higher than your competitors yeah and that's what makes special operations
so great is that not everyone's a a player they're not that's a small element the the long tail
but the overall performance of the entire force is much higher yeah you know slide that
thing to the right yeah that's the goal for sure so we're talking all about all this you know
experience and and how that's not the most important thing but then you guys go on to say this
which is also important we're not advocating that you disregard experience entirely you're not
going to hire kids straight out of high school for a C-suite position experience and past performance
matters for certain positions but you do need to be thoughtful about how you use experience
in the selection process we see companies make three common mistakes when it comes to looking
experience one they require experience that doesn't matter to job performance two they require
very specific experience when general experience would be just as good and three they prioritize
industry experience over character so you guys aren't saying to ignore experience you're saying
hey pay attention to it exactly it's and ultimately it's not what counts and you know one of the other
fallacies is you know if I have somebody with experience it was working at this competitor and I
bring them in well they were successful there they'll be successful here that that's just I boggles my
mind and I see it all the time but yeah these are the three the three mistakes and you know we talk
about this in the book about gates once you set your requirements for this role and they meet those
that gate then closes everything after that is this part of what determines success as far as the
nine attributes and most people and you'll and on the ground level you'll watch a person come in you've
got these objective requirements and you'll have five people in the hiring process all these five
different members of the team and they will all ask different versions of the same questions about
their experience nobody's digging in nobody's digging in it I you know it's patience is a
virtue in my function I assure you and but they're listing out experience and hiring majors will
dump all of this stuff in thinking if I get all of this this experience and one person my company will
do better they're looking at the wrong things it's the character it's those attributes that make the
difference when when a COVID comes up when when a when another company comes out with a product when
you know we're behind or or we're short team members it's those character attributes that drive
that team forward when things get tough when you're under stress that's when character reveals
itself and in the business world that's when it counts the most so we over rotate on experience
and you know you know Mike and I try to go to great lengths in this book look we understand
your business leader you've got 50,000 things going on if you're a CEO you've got a million
things going on in your head but this will help you be better this is the competitive advantage
that you need and is prioritizing talent and these things that make the difference and yet these
three common mistakes they happen time and time and time again they will happen 10 times a day in
one company and that's a small company you get to a big company some of the fortune 50 that I've
worked with you'll see this a thousand times in one day and it and it multiplies itself but you guys have
both seen and I've seen it in my time you get a good leader you get talent on your team that's infectious
the game comes up you get a good player you get a rock star you're all like okay I'm chasing that guy
I'm coming up I gotta elevate my game because this is not looking good for me you know person
I love person on my right they're out trying to me I gotta step it up so you know you've got to
get the experience that's minimum for the job hey you gotta be able to do these things in the job
it doesn't matter we're not saying disregard it don't make it so specific that is really now talent
and that happens a lot and industry experience is not as important as you think and I mean google
points it out I mean it you know statistically it's not important but it makes managers feel better
oh I took somebody from my competitor they were doing really well they know our industry they're
gonna do well here it's just a fallacy and and if we can get people focused on character if we get
people focused on leadership that will power your company when the hard times come hey you're
gonna rock it you're gonna survive you're gonna make the U.S. economy that much more powerful
if you get the right mindset and you focus and you drive and get after it Brian Decker
talked about this with special forces assessment selection so to get into any of these special
operations community intellectual horsepowers requirement you have to have a minimum score we take
as bad there's a score once person passes that intelligence requirement what George is talking
about is that gate is closed it no longer comes back into the planning factor the hiring factor
whatsoever and what they found is that level they put a lot of thought behind it and what they see
is that if somebody hits what requirement dead on and somebody exceeds that requirement is that
the person that exceeds that requirement it's not necessarily correlated to a higher level of
performance so that's why you have to be very careful upfront about the gates you select
you know Brian Decker also told a story about again you know industry experience versus none
so when he was running SFAS you know sometimes we we bring civilians on and get in sort of the
dog and pony they put two groups through some obstacles that special forces soldiers run through
in groups and again these exercises are you know the cadre are watching to see what behaviors
come out from that from the individuals so it's a group of MBAs who were off the charts intelligence
had industry experience were were currently getting their MBAs and then a group of undergrads
you're talking 18 19 20 year olds first group of 27 to 35 year olds and you know naturally Brian
Decker and his cadre you know they were shown a good time but had an assumption that the
MBAs were just going to outperform the undergrads like cans down how do you think that I know
the undergrads absolutely decimated every obstacle much quicker than the MBA group
and it goes to to show you that you know that even though they had prior experience more vast
experience those undergrads actually because they lacked ego so it's yes they lacked the group
dynamic it goes to so if you have a lot of talented individuals that are humble and
lackey you go when they come together it's an exponential effect one plus one isn't too
with a group that truly unifies behind a common good one plus one equals three that it's an
exponential effect in task unit bruiser there was a point where we were I don't know how far
we were from deploying but we knew we were deploying to Iraq and one of the senior officers at the
command he came to me and said hey you know you're going to Iraq do you want to switch out
one of your platoons with this other platoon commander with this with this other platoon
who the platoon commander has a lot more experience than your two you know your two oh I see
is which was Seth and Lave and it's kind of funny because remember how the ceilings were out
because they were doing construction so Seth and Lave were in the task unit bruiser office and they
here this individual basically asking me if I wanted to swap out either one of these two so
Seth and Lave had very little experience they both on one deployment but they had just been
in the teams for like two years and one of the platoon commanders in one of the other platoons
had a lot more experience like he was a prior-in-listed guy and so the senior officer was saying hey
you know you can take one you know you can take this guy and his platoon and he's got way more
experience and might be a lot better for you and I was like I was like no and at this point I already knew
Seth and Lave and I go um no I said these guys have exactly what I want them to have which is
they're tough they're humble and they listen and that's all that's all I need that's like my
most important characteristics and he was like are you sure and I was like 100% that was that.
Next section the nine foundational character attributes of talent under pressure
one's mental and physical limits hard skills rapidly degrade what remains is character
skills are by design meant for unpredictable situations and environments says retired
seal commander rich divinity if businesses are interested in forming organizations and teams that
effectively deal with unpredictability and complexity they have to go deeper than the guy who has
the best sales record or the Harvard grad who's at the top of the class they have to look at character
characters key because it is an indicator of a person's capacity general William Boynkin points
to capacity as more important than current ability quote what are you looking for hard skills
or capacity ideally look for both but if you have to choose and you have a fair way of doing so
assess their capacity what is their capacity to learn new skills what is their capacity to think
for themselves what is their capacity to problem solve is it interesting you're here general Boynkin
like one of the priorities that he puts in there is their capacity to think for themselves not to
follow rules but to think for themselves back to the book according to general Boynkin it is the
focus on capacity is made special operation so successful on the battlefield and beyond a person's
character is the aggregate of their deeply ingrained attributes as we define it the nine foundational
character attributes of high potential individuals are drive resiliency adaptability humility integrity
effective intelligence team ability curiosity and emotional strength these traits are predictors
of high performance these attributes cannot be taught so they should be the focus of your hiring
check and then you're going to a little spot a little section about how
different special operations group sort of way those things out a little bit differently but
they all are looking for the same basic the same basic things kickcare doctor care all green
air force kernel psychologist he was heavily involved in the Marsoch assessment selection
he set a grid he's like they're all basically looking for ice cream just different like slightly
different flavors but you know the special forces guys seals Marsoch you know the Afsoch
guys of PJs and CCTs they're all interchangeable we have throw them in their group the attributes
are are very close totally you go into resiliency here a little bit somebody with high resiliency
bounces back from stress quickly is adaptable and is not easily discouraged and individual with
high resiliency resist quitting and is focused on completing goals essentially resiliency is how
people handle setbacks and persevere in the face of challenges they accept failures part of the process
they don't accept it passively but utilize their lessons learned and mistakes as a basis to grow
and then you go into a well it's a section about a person that could be considered possibly one of
the most resilient human beings in the world which is Mike Day who is just on this podcast number
241 and you know shot 27 times and then killed the enemy that had shot him and just unbelievable
story you put that in there you you've gone so yeah adaptability you talk about adaptability talk
about humility and here we go people often asked us what is the most important trade of any leader
without a doubt it's humility the US army a 244 year old institution credited with training
some of our nation's most prominent leaders and practically writing the leadership manual for
leaders in any field recently added humility as one of the key attributes of good leaders to the
army doctrine publication six tack 22 saying a leader with the right level of humility is a
willing learner maintains accurate self awareness and seeks out others input and feedback
and this is something that one day on our echelon front ops call I said hey I've got something to
tell everyone in this group we've been talking about humility as the most important characteristic
for a leader for the past 13 years or whatever was 12 years at the time and the army just added
this to their manual which is freaking awesome because those characters extend and changed for a
long long time in the army but they realized if you're not humble you got problems I just want to say
plagiarism is one of the high forms of flattery so if you bring your lawyers at me we will go
to tell a lot of this is taken from my mentors I did not credit you in certain spots
it goes back to Johnny and I think the military as a whole there was a point where we viewed
humility as weakness and I think at a young age I miss took somebody like Johnny who's just one of
the most humble dudes he still is as a slight form of weakness it's funny that the army I think
sort of has morphed as well their their view on that the criticality of humility
yeah no no doubt about it and you also realize after you know you've realized
the thing that pointed this out to me strong did anything else was when we were fire a guy
that was going through my training we would be firing that person if they want a leadership position
if they want a leadership position they could get fired for safety or a number of anything
any other things but if they were getting fired from a leadership position they were generally
having safety problems they weren't having they knew how to shoot their gun they were in good
physical condition they were getting fired because they lack humility which meant they weren't
listening to anybody else they weren't listening to the critique from their own
platoon they weren't listening to advice from their platoon chief or from their task in the
corner anyone else I definitely not the freaking training contract so they're just a disaster
and I have to bring up a comment a youtube comment okay so the Johnny Kim podcast
on youtube and it says something like you know the title of the podcast is
Johnny Kim you know seal sniper harver doctor astronaut and the first comment on youtube is
dude can't hold a job which I thought was pretty funny
integrity you guys talk about integrity I mean these you go through these characteristics kind of
each one effective intelligence talks to me about effective intelligence what was effective
intelligence compared to just plain old intelligence and I hope this has something to do with the fact
that speaking of acquiring people there was a time in the late 90s where in the seal teams in the
officer community I wasn't an officer yet but they were the seals were starting to get popular
and they started getting really good candidates for the officer program and so they started recruiting
and beyond just recruiting they started accepting all these just Ivy League Ivy League
individuals you meet every every every new group of officers that we show up the seal team
you know there'd be a bunch of enable academy guys because they get a bunch of the billets every year
and then there'd be a bunch of guys from freaking harvered and and jail and these really smart guys and
maybe they didn't have and I'm not saying this about every because some of them were great guys
but not all of them have what I'm hoping is referred to in this book as effective intelligence
is that someone accurate it is I'm gonna take one step back so integrity I know we sort of
glossed over that Josh cotton doctor cotton is very passionate about this one he's done a lot of
studies and look at the data organizations that are in you know high ethics or highly you know
high in integrity the culture is much healthier than organizations that don't and I know that's
sort of an obvious statement but you look at Enron yeah and I think also you you you say it seems like
an obvious statement and yet there's so many organizations that let those things slide and here's
the problem with letting things slide when it comes to integrity once this is you know this slippery
slope sometimes they say a slippery slope fallacy because you know well just because I did this
doesn't really mean I'm gonna do that the slippery slope when it comes to integrity is I think
is almost unstoppable thing because you know if I let echo get away with something well now he's got
something on me and now he lets me get away with something we go back and forth we go on this downward
spiral and there's no one that can I once I once I give up my integrity I give up my ability to
tighten anyone else's integrity up and you've also said a new standard you've put your personal
stamp on approval the that behavior is now tolerated yep and you that's what makes it so hard you can't
go backwards yeah you can't unring that bell it's really hard to do with all and if you have to go backwards
because look you can put yourself in a situation what do you do you own it you stand up in front of
the troops you say hey look I made a bad decision this is a bad personal decision I thought this
was a good thing to do it didn't make sense it was the wrong thing I won't let it happen again
that might be you know that's your that's your first step in trying to recover your integrity
yeah but when you give it up that's why it's so you know the moral high ground the moral high ground
and keeping the high ground it's talked about this the other day on EF online it's like
once you give up the moral high ground it's just like being in combat you now you now are going
to have to fight to get it back and it's a freaking uphill battle and there's a good chance
you can't get up there anymore so you cannot give up that moral and ethical high ground it just
it's it's one of the worst possible moves you can make on the battlefield and it's one of the
worst possible moves you can make in life so I didn't mean to breeze over integrity like that
but no doubt it's a it's a core component of what you got to be looking for in people
and people don't scream for it that's the weirdest thing nobody ever asked the
well I should say nobody I want to be careful on extremes there but I've watched you know
the predominance of the hiring I do I manage a team but most of the hiring that I'm looking
after is executive level and you know all of these offers come by and you're talking
half million cash and more I mean they're their significant compensation and I don't
hear anybody ask the question can you give me an example of when you had the hold the line on
integrity and take the harder path even just that simple question you won't hear it in an
interview process it would it would shock me if I heard it but it is so fundamental if you don't
have this the rest doesn't matter if there's if the integrity's gone that's it you you cannot
have a person without integrity in your organization full stop what was interesting is we were
writing this book as so calm was dealing with a number of ethical issues and let's be asked a
lot of them were coming from the CO community and you know we we sort of struggled hey do we have
to change in the language in here but you know one individual doesn't speak for the organization
but they do when they're on the front lines or front pages front page they speak for your
organization and you know you mentioned Ivy League and and I feel bad sometimes because I overindex
on Ivy League guys and sometimes I'm critical there there were some great CO officers that came out
for certainly for sure some outstanding guys no doubt but they were more the exception than the
the norm so as I'm talking to Johnny Kim Johnny was like speaking Harvard that was after he
became a CEO so he gets a he gets a pass and and Johnny brought up a story in my life where I'm
like Johnny that's that's not a good story so you know we're talking about buzz we're talking
about Ryan and him and I or you know you could tell we're getting a little emotional on the phone
he's like hey you remember that time we had a Harvard officer in our Buds class who actually
worked for N-Ron but some officer you know I don't know what what what what the fascination was it like
all this guy went to Harvard news with that run and you know in these in Buds and um this guy was
arguably one of the smartest guys in the class now as part of Johnny um and he said that's nice
this guy just alienated everyone he thought he was the smartest man in the room and he was
egotistical he was an a-hole and Johnny's like so he's done the story about we're running to the
chowhole and still there's like 250 to 125 people in the class in this guy knew I was a recon Marine
and you know sometimes you'll run the formation there's one guy that runs to the right of the
is it the left of the left left this is my yeah for marine that's pretty embarrassing so we're
gonna do the left but his hands up the wall and makes an elder left one and he's singing cadence
and he's just ripping on recon and Johnny's laughing on the phone because the whole class saw
this guy just fall out of the main formation run out and I just took a hand you know sort of the
night not the night hand but the hard hand was there over not to slap not to helmet right off his uh
his head and he goes wrong across the street and he has to run over and I just took over the
cadence and I'm like Johnny that was not my best man but this guy I kind of liked that moment this
guy was uh he was gonna make it through a hurry he was gonna meet the physical requirements
in the mental toughness requirements but the cotter a stepped in and dropped him and that's rare
because he was just that toxic it that toxic and it's funny that the instructors could recognize
that because usually instructors like hey he meets all these requirements we can breathe that out of them
effective intelligence is the ability to use the intelligence you have in a real world setting
to solve problems for which there is no playbook and that is the heart of special operations
so there you know we found a study what would you guess it was the average GPA of most
millionaires that went to college I have no idea 2.9 2.9 and that's my seven graces because I think
I got a 2.9 on it so I'm like hey Abby so what we found in the people that are off the charts
smart and what we saw in the seal teams is that they suffered a lot from the process through
analysis or they made things so overly complex and when you work in high-staking environments
time is usually a factor and it goes back to the second law of combat simple yeah that's that's
all good stuff and again hey we're not bagging on the guys that came in and had awesome education
and a lot of them were awesome and and here's another another reason that it hurt the community
was because these guys would be coming in and they were had such high potential this is in the
90s there's no war going on they do four years they get they do their system of
two commander they do their putton commander they look at what's ahead of them in the 90s and it was like oh
you're gonna you're gonna you're gonna you're gonna you know ride a desk for the next 18 or whatever the
next 16 years before you can retire and guys would say you know I'm gonna get out and I'm gonna go
do do something else so it hurt us from a just a personnel building standpoint as well
but that's uh the other thing that I've seen is where you get
and look some people pull this off and they do it great but there are some people that have a problem
taking their highly intellectual view of something and translating it to the frontline troops
where now the people the people that have to go and execute whatever did you want them to execute
is doing it in a simple clear concise right that's why simple is one of the laws of combat
but you know part of the law of combat is planning keep your your planning simple the other
part of that law of combat is to communicate simply and there's a lot of people that have a hard time
doing not a lot there are some people that have a hard time doing that so that's a
that effective intelligence is uh is definitely an important thing and that is the one I mean
one of the attributes specific to Marsauk is that they called it effective intelligence and that's you know
again flint we we we took that one it was the way they described it in their assessment and
selection manual that that's one of their primary requirements the way they described it was absolutely
beautiful. Marsauk had the advantage of having joined so calm late you know I was a recon marine
we were never part of so calm back then and eventually 2000 was at five six Marsauk that one
led by Colonel Kaczynski two 2004 yeah because they were leave me and Baghdad that's right
and everyone's like yeah this is a no-brainer but they could look when they were building the Marsauk
assessment selection course they could look at what the sealer and the SF community and they were very
deliberate and that's the Marsauk community stand by they're they're they're just going to be
powerful they already are yeah you know we were talking about to bring this over to the business world
you know we talk about effective intelligence and people over indexing on experience they're
wanting people to come and take a playbook and run it over here and and assuming that the situations
that you're going to find in this particular business are going to be exactly the same and so
they're thinking well they've handled these situations over here they'll be able to handle them here
will be successful in the story it's the effective intelligence that's not assuming any course of action
for a business problem they're looking at it that that ability to take the intellectual horsepower
and look at all of the data points all of the indicators all of the little pieces of intel
collect them and put them into a cohesive picture that then you explain simply with the plan of attack
and it's so different than experience and if we can get people to index on that versus the experience
you see the difference immediately you know George we actually we talk about the 70%
solution that's a great example what you're you're explaining in a business context is again
the guys that are wildly intelligent when they only have 70% of the operational picture they can't
make a decision but people high in high effective intelligence can draw threads parallels and make a
very decisive decision with interplayed information and you know they we pulled a quote out
because we're talking to Tracy Kio and so she was talking about the CEO of Microsoft
said we don't want no adults we want learn adults if you can get that how far ahead of the game are you
I'm gonna I'm gonna reach into some people's brains that are listening to this right now
and I'm just gonna do a little a little tweak on their brains because I promise you I promise you
that there's some people that when you said hey you're talking about someone that just takes a playbook
and runs the playbook and that's it I promise you that there's some people that are thinking wait that's
what I want that's what I want right there I want someone who's gonna take that playbook and they're
gonna run that's what they're gonna do and and I'm gonna reach in there and just I have to stop you
from thinking that because I know that's what you think you want that's what that's what leaders think
they think hey look I've got this all figured out if everyone would just do what I tell them to do
run the playbook just do what I say to do will be good to go here's the thing there's no static
function in the world that what you want is non-thinking apparatus to run a playbook and if you do
if you have something like that yes automate that get a robot to do that task and do them
over and over again the same way when you're hiding a leader you want them to be able to adapt
and change and make improvements and do whatever they have to do to win that's what you want so if you
hear George say hey we don't want someone that's just gonna run the playbook and you're thinking
no way I do that do want that no you don't and this was the same thing is happen to the
micro managers coming through my train when I was running training you get someone that's thinking hey
look I've been I'm either I'm experienced or I know I'm highly educated I know how to run these
operations so everyone if everyone just get in line and just do what I tell them to do will be
good to go and what is that turned into it's micro management that you can't tell everyone what to do
there's no way you can be everywhere or once and everything falls apart you need thinking shooters
is what we used to call it so what what we're offering at at EF Overwatch is thinking leaders that will
actually solve problems yeah you're right and and you know we made a little vignette a little video about this
but coming up through the army and you know joccal I was actually one of those people that
started to get out in the 90s I was I'd gotten through you know I had two years of line command
and I'm thinking I love this I got to go to field I love being with my soldiers and then you
didn't you know your time for a command comes up in the army and you're looking ahead and you're going
now I'm gonna say something and I don't want to hear crap about it later Mike but I'm thinking
I got a life of Harvard graphics ahead of me which preceded powerpoint just to bring you along
with the program here but and and so I got out but I have to tell you the US army and the US military
is the world's greatest leadership incubator and I owe so much back to the military to my mentors
to my coaches to the soldiers to the non-commissioned officers people I served with and it created
and made that thinking leader do I have all the answers no no but that the US military when we
talk about it yet folks we talk about placing leaders it's you're in a fishbowl 247 365 is a
leader it is the biggest and best burden you can ever carry is to be a leader in the United States
military it is just it's an honor a privilege it's scariest how it's rewarding is how it's everything
but you're in an incubator to lead and and I am so so grateful for that and and so when we talk
about the principles in these book and when we talk about that effective intelligence the army
helped me in my case deliver that that that did I know everything about the enemy no I had to take all
these cues and start putting pieces together what do I have to do what are my possible courses
of action what's good what's bad what's high risk what's low risk and anyway it just it is it is
astounded me how much I learned to think about the art of leadership coming through the US military
I mean muskets were not as intuitive during his days as you know for us we have now but we had good
horses like so you know I'm good with that this is what I have to put up with daily
team ability did you guys make up that work that hyphenated work team ability we did not
we I think we found that within our research we we we liked it so we we stuck with yeah kind of
because we were talking with Brian Decker we were talking a lot of people
that you everybody had different versions of that same word so we put that together yeah the
team work and how different and do you have the ability to put yourself whatever level you're at
as a team player and that there's a certain element of that to be a follower as well
what do we put everything like that word yeah okay yeah we came up with it
good ago you say about nothing worth accomplishing it can be done alone there are no
rampos in the military that might look cool in the movies but individual is die pretty quickly on
the battlefield or worst get others hurt they're great success requires that we work together
curiosity exploring the unknown and questioning the status quo and pursue to better
more effective solutions is the key to innovation without curious individuals nothing would ever
change or improve emotional strength in the US military and I'm given like these highly abbreviated
definitions and you guys go into it not not only do you go into better examples but then not only
not only more detailed definitions but examples you know you're talking about the rescue
cap and films I mean you got really cool examples in here to back these things up but that's
where people buy the books so that they can read those curiosity already covered that emotional strength
in the US military the whole man concept is the belief that the individuals need to be assessed
based on the entirety of their person mental physical and emotional and emotionally strong individual
has a positive attitude high empathy and emotional control in stressful situations many of the
individuals we interviewed identified positive attitude as important to their hiring decisions
attitude is contagious positivity breeds positivity while negativity
be gets more negativity an individual the negative attitude can still produce results but is often at the expense
of company culture typically that one person who's also not worth the resulting damage to the team
you have highlighted this section emotional strength is the ability to regulate ones emotions
to remain logical under stress situations marsawk calls this stress tolerance and defines it as
the ability to deal with ambiguous dangerous high pressure or frustrating events while maintaining control
of emotions actions composure and effectiveness it is a universal truth in life that humans don't
make good decisions in emotional state people who are able to remain cool calm and collected in the
face of challenges and the unknown are people you want in your organization this is the exact reason
soft creates stressful environments to mimic the conditions of war during assessment and selection
programs stress tolerance is so important that some soft organizations even use heart rate
monitors to evaluate individuals psychological physiological responses to stress
got to stay calm got to be able to detach these were this chapter I mean you get people that
are very passionate Ryan Decker was heavily involved in this chapter rich divinity
geverserved with rich I did not rich is a brother very very passionate about in fact he has a book
called the attributes 25 hidden drivers of optimal performance it's about attributes some of his
observations like empathy you know when you think about it in the way he described it he said
special operations is very good about dialing up and dialing down empathy he said it's almost like
a dimmer switch when you go out on an operation in your right in the home there's a likelihood
that there are women and children in there and you know you've got a dial down or empathy to
accomplish the mission not you know safeguard them while while still bringing the hurt to the
the combatants you're known after um yet we're very good about down that empathy back up when we
come back from from from uh operations so um very detailed conversations very passionate about these
these subjects and um those two were instrumental in uh in the chapter yeah you guys dug into
some like I said good stuff and obviously going with getting those dead information for good people
creating a talent acquisition plan talk to me about that well you know one of the many
mistakes that you know once you get past you know making sure that your chief human resources
chief human resource officer is strategic and tied into your CEO you have to look
ahead you know at that old adage if you if you fail to plan you're planning to fail people look
at talent and recruiting and staffing is hey we've got these open positions let's crank it there's
not often a plan behind it and that starts with looking at your company and it starts with going okay
what is the strength of our company when it comes to talent what gaps do we have what gaps do we
have in leadership what gaps do we have in technology what gaps do we have in sales in leaders
in individual contributors do we have key points of failure do we have only one person that can do
this job and if they go we've nobody to step up do we have number two do we have number three
okay where are we gonna grow where are we gonna grow next year and you know this could go on and on
and on but the basics are is you need to be sitting down and looking at each organization and what
are you missing why are you winning in that department why are you winning in sales why are you winning
in product why are you winning in service or whatever and find out what your gaps are and that's
where you start with talent and get that down into a plan that says okay we're gonna go after this
in a strategic way we are gonna go out into the market you know we're gonna look within our own
organization first but then we're gonna go out to the market and we're gonna build an organization
in talent acquisition HR that says these are the people that are the gatekeepers and they are
going to find and they are gonna know what our success profiles look like and they are gonna
bring us high caliber people with those character attributes to be considered for these positions
but you plan it out first is going oh you know what hey we have an open position over here you
know we've authorized 10 head count in this particular department you've got an empty seat what
do you need that's not a plan that's just that's a button to see like we talked about
you you have to take that time to say what does my organization look like as far as talent and people
it's one of the many things that because everybody's focused on everything else they don't take the
time to go what's gonna bring us into 21 what's gonna bring us into 22 you and like Don Roberts
and said in our book you have to be higher for the skills and needs of the future where your company
is gonna go and I think we even brought it up it's like the term is fighting in the last war
you know you're not thinking ahead is to what you're gonna need and so there's no plan to go
after that and build that for the future this is one of those things where you it happens to
echelon front sometimes be working with a company and and you know they're whatever company is
it happens all the time companies caught up in that firefight day to day they're trying to survive
they're trying to make things happen they got projects do they got all the things going on and then
you know you ask them about you know hey do you do you have anyone that's looking at you know
six months down the line about where you're gonna be about what supplies you're gonna need or whatever
just whatever those and and you can see their caught their caught like on their heels because they don't
and if you if you think about what you're talking about here a talent acquisition plan how we're
actually going to build a company and you think about how many companies are out there
that the way they think about is just it's a fire fight right we need to fill this seat right now
that's the plan the plan is hire someone to do that role next week we have a new plan the plan is
hire someone to keep fill this other role yep there's no unified long-term strategic plan of what we're
doing and what is the military do better than well there's many things they do better than most
there's always a pipeline there's always a pipeline there's always a plan there's a succession plan
there is a pipeline of high quality people coming into a pipeline so we can assess and select and put them into
those things it's it's a forethought we have people that are out there doing that stuff but they're actually
thinking what do we need for 21 22 23 24 25 won't even that goes all the way out the systems in equipment
and but the military does it all whereas corporations will go to your point they're out there firefighting
oh wow wow I've got an opening on team I got to bring somebody in but if you do have an opening on
your team it should be hey we got a pipeline already talent that's banging out the door to get
into this place because we have a talent mindset we have leadership we are focused we empower our
people we lead our people we drive our people we win and people will want to be a part of that
yeah you guys break it down and hear what you have to do what you have to do to create this
talent acquisition plan defining greatness in your organization identify your high performance
as a session talent objective assessments just you guys go line by line and explain all these things
in great detail build your talent profiles mic you already mentioned that workforce plan I mean you
just go through the detail so that people that don't have a plan can actually open up this book
and put a plan together so that they're moving forward with a route right with a route instead
of just moving forward in the blind which is crazy to think about and yet it happens all the time it's
just start with the conversation the senior leaders and companies are not having this conversation
and that's where it starts there's many ways to go about this you don't need to bring you know
bring in a top five consulting firm yes you can bring in the info for watching that's my plug
but you know this this isn't something where you're going to bring in you know industrial
organizational psychologists and you're going to create assessments that are going to solve this for you
this is this is this is basic leadership that you have to have the discipline to fall through on
and you can create these processes from scratch special operations community how to start somewhere
they basically started from scratch and you can build this it's going to take time
but you have to have those conversations and you have to have those conversations all the time
every every week every month are we selecting not only for what we need now but five years
don't mind if you're creating a town profile how does that top profile change with the digital
transformation five years from now what's going to be required in terms of attributes five years
down the road or ten years down the road? Next section is about attracting top talent what talented
people look for attracting talent requires knowing what talented people want many companies assume
that the answer is money and perks they offer competitive salaries and wonderful
creature comforts high end expression machines fully stocked kitchens pool tables and more
and yet they still have rich talent on the other end we've seen countless people turn down
higher pay to stay with the company where they feel challenged and love the people they work with
if you want people to dedicate their talents to your company you must offer something equally
valuable in return since talented people have high drive they are interested they're just as
interested in achievement and challenge as money let's not fool ourselves if your compensation
benefits are not competitive within your industry you'll lose out on talent but attracting top
people goes beyond that beyond money talented people look for talented leaders and colleagues
a sense of community a challenge opportunities for professional and personal growth and purpose
talent attracts talent it's a magnet good leaders or you want to go even in my military career
I know who those good leaders are and I'm like oh I got to get that organization because they're
going to help me get to the next level they're going to pass on that experience that coaching the
mentorship I did that in the military I do it here in the corporate world I've been doing it for
20 years you know one of the people in this book I actually followed to another organization he's like hey
hey I'm like I'm there I'm there you know he goes do you want to talk about the
compensation I said no let's just move let's go and the great part is is that you know there's
a lot of bad habits that get you into a vicious cycle but attracting great talent gets you into a
positive cycle of attracting better talent all the time you're alumni in the people currently
in your organization are the best way to attract talent hands down I mean you're doing it right now
you've probably caused a lot of young men and women to in list or seek missions in the military
based off the lessons that are learning but yes that is a factual statement there we go there's a lot
of a lot of people out there that are straight up in the military from listening to podcast
because I hear from all the time it's awesome in fact we're having dinner last night Air Force
individual came up and said hey I follow everything you do thank you for what you do and then he
asks he handed me the phone said hey can you take a picture of Jack and I might say really he's like yeah
okay so you tell the story and this is a hundred percent true I didn't come from the military
lineage I didn't I'd seen the movies that they were pretty cool I thought the military was potentially a
path for me there was multiple paths the backup dancer from Madonna was just not going to be a
career that provided you know what I needed to live so I wouldn't know that it inside Joe it's
it's also frightening mental image I assure you there's a sequence on somewhere in his house so
18 and living in Colorado I ran into I'm not gonna mention his name which is called staff sergeant Ben
staff sergeant Ben was attending the University of Colorado on the meat set program which is the same
program I eventually attended a tech say them the Marine and Listic Commission education program
where they take the enlisted seven to get their degrees in the ultimately uh earn a commission
so I met Ben and at the age of 18 here you have the staff sergeant from the force recon community
and he was humbly confident he was articulate highly respectful to everyone what differentiated
him from the other Marines was even though he was you know this dual cool you know highly
decorated is he was actually nicer than the other Marines he had nothing to prove and physically
the whole man concept he was there he had a stature about him and when I made team I'm like
dude that guy's awesome that's who I want to be that's who I want to be and I mean to the point
where I enlisted in the Marine court have come a recon ring because of the image because of the
person the Marine court put forward in front of young men and women like me when you have strong
leaders stepping up representing their communities it it sends a very strong message to people
that I want to join that and it never changed when I went to infantry school you know seven
recon ring stepped in front of us and said who wants to screen the front recon and like oh my god it's
like seven staff sergeant Ben's and then when I finally met the seals you know walls in the
Marine court I'm like oh my god that's my next challenge and your alumni and current employees
or team members are your greatest recruiting to it always yeah I was I've had many conversations
with businesses as you know they're losing somebody somebody decide to leave and they start thinking
about we're gonna end them with the no compete we're gonna get them with this we're gonna get
them with that and I say I got a better idea why don't you wish them luck and thank them for what they
did while they were here and let them go about it away because if you send them out the door with a
kick in the ass they're not coming back if you send them out the door and say good luck it's been
great working with you first of all they're not gonna go out in the street and say you know oh
joc was a jerk you don't want to work for him it's gonna go I left them but they're good people
right and that those people will come back to you by the way I mean eventually they're gonna come back
because you know somebody is over the reason they're leaving us because if you're treating people
well the reason people are leaving us because someone is lying to them you know they're lying they're
giving them some lying that they're not gonna be able to uphold so when people are leaving it's
it's your alumni you got a treat them like you're alumni and say hey good luck let me know if you
never need anything you know even though you're working for a competitor it's all right you know
what are my friends yeah you know well we we took a one step further we have some of the uh
the just great members of my team about 90 days down the road they'll call them up where they went
hey how are things going for you hey was it everything that you expected I hope your
experiencing great success and it's everything because there's people that move along because
for whatever reason they're next challenge maybe somewhere else and you have to be accepting of that
and you and you have to to your point encourage that too and if you have good number two you're
falling you don't worry about it but reach out to somebody and say hey how are you doing you know what
hey if things aren't going well there hey give me a call give me a call because we love to have
it in your hair you wouldn't believe how many people are going you know what they don't have to admit
that they made a mistake they're going you know what it wasn't as good it wasn't as good
we we call we we call the ultimate litmus test it's if there's pride in the organization whether
you're with the organization at that time or whatever look at the Marine Corps when somebody says hey
you know what you do while I'm a former Marine they they're proclaimed proclaim that vice
somebody say hey I'm a I'm a coder no if if they're pride prideful in the organization they say
I'm a Googler and so when they identify with the organization it's one they're sort of identifying
that there's a talent oriented culture and that there's strong leadership at that company to the
point where they have a sense of pride and that becomes a talent magnet for other people at that
cocktail party that you said it so very powerful we we can't sort of over index on that one enough
no it it's just you know everybody in your company is a talent scout everybody in your company is an
example of what you hold as important especially your leaders when they're out in the public
and everybody should always be looking we talked about this like you know the term is
opportunistic hiring most people are only hiring for an open position but if you've got talent
scouts out there they're bringing talent to you and saying you know what dispersions a difference
maker this isn't a player we have got to find a place in our organization so everybody when you have
a talent mindset it's not just you know from the CEO down all the way through that you've got
them mechanics and you're looking for top talent but it's all your employees once they're in the door
they're branding going hey you want to come try out here this is a tough place to work and and that's
exactly what happens in the special operations community there is no shortage of people signing up
to get a beating no shortage whatsoever and in an ideal world if you have a company with that
kind of mindset you'll have those people going you know what I got to work there because that that's
going to make me better either jockey you brought a point about when somebody leaves your organization
you show them respect and try to keep that relationship intact what we found great organizations
do even in the hiring process if they don't hire somebody is they spill still spend time to say
hey we love to debrief you on why we didn't select you for this position and they show them a
great deal of respect the special operations community does this when somebody drops from the
buds they do pull them aside and they have a conversation hey what do you want to do in the
Navy what have you learned from this process and they speak highly of the seals or the special forces
selection process when they leave we've seen organizations that are so highly respectful to people
that they don't even hire that at the end of the debrief they say wow no other organization has
done that for me they just simply do some don't even respond or some just say hey we didn't
select you next and they said it's not uncommon organizations that sort of follow this this tactic
it's part of their culture with the person looks at him and says do you have any other positions
available in that in the organization and literally make hires based off that by showing them such
a great experience during that hiring process it drives me nuts to have a bad process because
effectively and especially in today's era of social digital media that experience is your brand
going back out in the marketplace and you've created an impression you've created a customer
consumer or you've pushed one away if you didn't select them so it you know how you treat people
in the process it says everything about your company says everything about having a talent mindset
yeah and the bottom line with all these things that we're talking about all these behaviors is
you're you have a culture that people that are talented are gonna want to go to and that's what
this you know this section's about a sense of community the challenge the growth opportunities
having a purpose there salary and benefits given people ownership given people control over their
own destiny and that all those things you kind of sum up here with brand yourself as a talent
magnet the US military especially special operations has skillful marketing and branding which
is very weird for me to say but I know it's very true they're branding I mean let's face it the
Marine Corps is branding itself way before branding was a thing same with the army I mean I remember
I was totally brainwashed when I was a kid to be all you can be or the few the proberines like
that was just 100% just my whole branding in my mind is stuck to this day you know the few
the proberines Rangers lead the way that others may live day of press or lever lever how do you
say that can't we we can't say that they the press or lever is that right I think you got it right
yes sorry Tim Kennedy bro I'm sorry Tim Kennedy day a presso lever there you go to free the
oppressed the only easy day with yesterday and what you're doing with these things is is the other
the other big part of this is employee value proposition what you as an employee as employer
offer to your employees and you kind of you kind of lay out some you lay out one price waterhouse
coovers from empowering mentorships to customize coaching PWC provide you with the support you need
to help you develop your career you'll work with people from diverse backgrounds and industries
to solve important problems are you ready to grow here's the here's the Ranger one recognizing
that I volunteered as a Ranger fully knowing the hazards of my chosen profession I will always
endure to uphold the prestige honor and high a speed of core of the Rangers acknowledging the fact
that a Ranger is a more elite soldier who arrives at the cutting edge of battle by land sea or air
I accept the fact that as a Ranger my country expects me to move further faster and fight harder
than any other soldier Rangers lead the way branding I hate calling that stuff brand and because it's so
badass using social media to reach top talent all right let's hear it guys you guys
apparently you know you just talked about this what we talked about last night with so come
doing oh yeah so come and starting a podcast who did they reach out to they reach out to me but
yeah it's very cool what they're doing you know they've got a they they just wanted to you know get my kind
of cut on it and very cool what they're trying to do you know they're just trying to get the word out there
and and then you pointed out to me that whatever a year ago so come started an Instagram account
so we see our own special operations community building their social media presence so that they can
communicate with the next generation of special operations humans the military has been
pretty good about this so back in the late nineties or mid nineties ex games was
really coming to to to to to fruition and the military started creating their own extreme sports teams
because that's where they knew the new talent is that that's where that you know the demographic
of the 18 or I'm sorry let's say 15 year olds to the 25 year olds was was pushing towards that
time where do you think the military is going now for recruiting video games e-sports teams
they're putting e-sports teams together now if you asked our generation when they said hey we're
going to go recruit out of the e-sports or video game town pools we'd probably say
no way yeah that future seals and future marsawk you know Raiders and special forces are not
going to come out of this communities that's wrong that's that's where the new talent lays not all
that they're still town out there playing sports you know on teams wrestling but you know
that's just this new generation they play a lot of video games and that's where they're they're
finding success with their recruiting yeah I'm curious about that video games make me nervous
because people get addicted to them and yeah it's really it's a real thing it's a real thing
so let's be honest yeah it missed my generation my my dad was not big on video games in the
house we didn't have it that's why when I would go to my friends house I would stay up till four
while they were sleeping playing the video games Nintendo my guidance on punch out but what did
the guys usually do when we got back from operations oh bro I mean my first deployment to
Iraq they had Halo set up between tents and then they had this so seals I was already like
like you guys are playing video games what do you wait what is this what are you guys doing pack man
I mean I don't know I'm so out of it I'm from you know back then you were really
back so I'm thinking what is this so I like I went in there looked in so you see whatever
the guys are playing Halo and and I just didn't really get it and I thought it was just weird
couple you know five or six seals that were all into it but then they had a siege so different
tournament of Halo did you hear what I just said we're in Iraq we're on deployment we're fighting
the enemy and they have a at the command of joint special operations task force for Iraq
they have a Halo tournament so that's a little bit embarrassing so it's embarrassing that I got
seals doing it it's even more embarrassing that they have a siege so different and the height of
embarrassment was when my two players went up there for the tournament not only did they win
they utterly destroyed everyone and I guess in that game you you in the game Halo the version
that they were playing you have to get to 50 kills and in the finals these two guys in the finals
they killed the opponent 50 times and they got killed the ones and they came back and they were
super stoked and I just was I was like gentlemen I'm very disappointed what's really crazy is
just I mean great guys and one of them was a total freaking physical stuff the other one was
when I bad asked you know pipeting seals so they were awesome guys so I don't know maybe I'm
misjudged and it does make me nervous because people get addicted to those video games
yeah kind of for the same reason they get addicted to other stuff too though a lot of the time
because they don't have like other stuff going on necessarily but I don't know it's been kind of
proven to that video games are like a good method of problem solving like in your brain so people
it's true they can be conducive in certain circumstances why don't you say that you're
gonna do some problems solving all very there's that too but you get guys to play video games
and you just so you see what I'm saying I'm saying it can be it can have a little roll in there
I just have a little roll has you said have you been good at any video game ever in your whole life
you like Charlie I tried playing with these guys I would take two steps and die yeah you're talking
my halo that ones like okay that's that ones kind of advanced like you mentioned Mike Tyson punch show
yeah I never never admitted to that who meant Mike doesn't did you mention that yeah
well it's too bad a beat like Tyson punch show I beat Mike Tyson punch out and regular punch out you know
what the what the differences nothing really except one is the last guys Mike Tyson you know
brown guy and then on regular punch out the last guy's Mr. Dream same exact pixel formation of the guy
except he's a little lighter because that's when I think Mike Tyson ran into some problem
publicly I think with the law and whatnot you know but yeah I think they just had a
documentary come out on the evolution of video games for the reflex yeah
shit check but thank you for staying up for this generation yes sir yeah
all right moving back to the subject at hand it's I did this I have it not there everywhere
creating the hiring team creating the hiring team is one of the most important decisions
to make in the talent war but we see companies make the same form of stakes again and again
here they are B players or C players being put in charge of hiring you already kind of mentioned that
that's not a universal statement but it does happen the hiring team is homogeneous
homogeneous homogeneous homogeneous there we go thank you actual Charles tighten up
the English major over there the hiring team is homogeneous which means what we've got
a team here and they're all they're all all engineers the same people all engineers the all sales
people wanted to one together look or to put it in the context of special operations if you just
selected breachers to be the team of people selecting not not not not the point man
not the navigator yeah your breachers are going to look for future breachers number three there's
no training what's the training that you're talking about you know how to dig in and first of all
and you know i've got to say this is that every time you hire there are legal ramifications
i could tell you horror stories about asking the wrong questions
no it's great actually i had i literally had a senior hiring manager go in and there was a
lady they came in and one of his questions was is winner you do and i'm like really and yeah she
wasn't pregnant so that made that just she got an offer on the spot for me we saved the company a
couple million dollars and a lawsuit but the training you have to teach people to make sure that
you're asking questions that are simply job related and performance related number one but number two
how do you dig in and examine those questions how do you put that person under pressure how do you
pressure test them and train your hiring managers otherwise you get five guys on the engineering team
and to my example five breachers who are all asking questions about breaching you're asking engineers
and they're all asking sit different well how did you do this at this company they go to the next
person you get candidates to come out go well i answered same questions seven times and hopefully
i got a right six out of seven times but you need to train your interviewing team as to what
your success profile is and you know there are nine attributes but those you're not looking for
all nine maybe it's three maybe it's four maybe it's two for this specific role how are you going to
dig in on those and illicit responses that tell you are they a person of high drive are they a
person of high resiliency are they adaptable do they have team ability how are you digging in
and which characteristics you're looking for depend on what the success profile of that particular
role is and you have to train people to do that interviewing is not a skill that people just
out of thin air can do very very well it takes time to train and the more you train those people
the you know the more clear they become on selecting the best candidate that's in front of them
for that role so training them to that process what is the process that works for you
for this organization you're you're you're hiring team of a players needs to understand the process
and then they under they need to understand as it's just talking about is what are you looking
for during that process so Brian Decker with the SFAS they would continually go through training as they
came up with obstacles and identifying that hey the reason we're putting them through this specific
obstacle is we're looking for these two attributes and this is how you judge based off the score
card where they they they score on that attribute so that's the the training we're talking about
let let me say this one thing we say a players because a true a player has humility
the ability to look at a bunch of young seal candidates or a bunch of future employees and say
that macro right there she has the potential to be a lot better than I am and she's going to
make me she's going to raise my performance as well she's going to raise the bar and she's going to
challenge me a players can do that because they want competition they want healthy competition they
want to be surrounded by other a players you put B players your C players what we're saying there
is again because back to you know fear based hiring is I don't want to be outshined that that
Johnny Kim right there I will be a non-player in the organization if he's there we're not taking
them that's what that's what that's what what happens and so when you have ego and you have people
that are mediocre performers in charge of your hiring guess what you're going to get mediocre tell
the last mistake that people make is hiring as a secondary function
so we're not going to take jocca willing as a troop commander the task commander say hey
you got to train to go to war oh hey by the way you've got to cut over the buds every day at
three p.m. to assist with the assessment selection you can't do the phrase in the military two
things you need one thing well yeah we take in this this is hard to take one of our
times we take a players off the battlefield guys who want to continue going to war and we say hey
for the next two years actually you're going to have a greater impact on the community your soul job
your one thing it's an out of secondary function this is your primary function for the next two years
or six months is focusing on filling the talent and assessing the selected people in the
organization that's what it means by a secondary function and then you can score it and then you can
do a feedback loop if you've got the same people and I mean you'll have multiple teams across
multiple departments but once you've seen how they interview if if each one of those talented
candidates is going through the same group of people and getting the same structure you can go back
and evaluate the results you can get that feedback loop okay we hired this person how did they do
or we hired this person and they didn't do well what did we miss in the process and you're going
back to the same group of people is how to iterate a little bit better and you get a little bit
better each time but if you keep changing that team out you're effectively you have no standard
or you get the standard of the day with the team that you put together but if you get those a
players you make hiring the priority for what they do you train them properly you can look at how
we're doing and how do we exponentially increase what they're doing that's hard for a business
leader to sometimes very hard very very hard so what you tell me to do is take my best salesman
or saleswoman take them off the line for six months and have them focus on hiring the next
generation of sales leaders and our answer is yes in the short term a tactical mindset that may hurt
if you have a strategic mindset for the long term for the long run if he hires
three or four solid sales leaders that's going to have a much more exponential effect
and impact on the organization again that's hard to do it was hard for the sealed community
to take guys like you off the battlefield and say hey we need you to run training now
we know where you wanted to be and so again a lot of this is getting
that we say talent mindset getting business leaders just to make that mental paradigm shift
of how do that tactical mindset into a strategic mindset to play the long game and that's what
the talent war is it's the long game it's just that important it you know everything in your
environment your your product your service the economy the market the global conditions are
going to change and they're going to change rapidly but those nine attributes don't change
and they allow you to confront any circumstance as a business with confidence and a win
those things just won't change everything around you will change but those leadership principles
those nine character attributes those are the foundations and they will let you attack and win
in any given situation when you don't pay attention to them you're firefighting
covid comes along oh my god what do we do everybody's you know chicken little's and and it
becomes a very difficult problem to solve versus okay got it Roger that's today's situation
let's go next section here's characters revealed at one's limits and there's a subsection
called mic feels the pressure this is it Mike thought staring up the rope i'm going to fail out of
buds because of a freaking rope two weeks prior mic it completed hell week the instructors had
even pulled them aside and said you're one of the standout leaders in the class we know what
you can do as a leader so we need you to step aside so that we can test and evaluate other officers
yet now mic was struggling to climb a basic rope like he had been climbing since day one of the
Marine Corps he had been climbing ropes for years and he was good at it he'd never failed to get
up one until now for the first time in training mic was displaying serious signs of fatigue it was
an ideal moment to test him so the instructors dug in shouting up at him the other students who had
already completed the exercise watched from their nearby formation mic started up the rope again
he could sense all eyes on him he could feel the pressure he made it ten feet and dropped
the instructors kept yelling and mic started up the rope again and again and again mic was frustrated
he felt like a dirt bag for not being able to get up the rope but there was no way he was going to
quit he started up the rope again and fell again he got to his feet and prepared to start
up the rope again but the instructors stopped him and pulled him aside out of view from the other students
it's okay we all have these days one of the instructors said we wanted to apply some pressure to you
to see how you would react and whether you would quit the instructors didn't really care whether mic
made it to the top of the rope or not good little test see where it's at that that day and again
I'd been in the Marine Corps for what five years at this point climb plenty of ropes was going to
climb the ropes I remember that day just something with the body was off I had zero energy and
you talk about feeling like the eyes were on me it was almost near tears not not from the pressure
but I would just spent all that together I was I was done and I mean it just reinforces the point
that you know you say character cannot be created where none exists and you truly don't know people
until you push them to the limits that's not just physical limits that's also mental limits
and that's the point of the special operations assessment and selection it's not because we're
sadistic maybe we are a little but it's not to put these young men and women through
you know paying for our benefit there's a purpose behind it much like an interview process
is we know that once we can push them to the threshold that's our moment okay now we're going to see
if this individual has what it takes if they have the right attributes one of the things in
you go back to the attributes one of one of our colleagues Jason Tuchen you know you talked about
resiliency the whole point of a lot of you know the special operations assessment selection is to see
how resilient people are he talked about in buds attracts much like the other special operations
some pretty phenomenal human beings like NCAA athletes and Olympic athletes and when he ran
first phase he saw a lot of these you know what people consider exceptional athletes quit
and he said they were low on resiliency because this was the first time they had failed
in their life and that's a point in the training as he says just to keep knocking people down
to see how they react and when you have a high achiever who's never really experienced failure
and they repeatedly fail in buds or these other assessment programs sometimes they quit
and that's what you're looking for but somebody who's experienced nothing but obstacles in their
life is well is more prepared for what they face in special operations and more equipped to deal
with crisis than some of these exceptional athletes who just never really face challenge.
Yeah you're gonna fail some stuff they're gonna make sure you fail some stuff 100% like you're not
going to pass everything not care who you are they're going to make you sure you fail some stuff
to make sure that when you do fail something you don't lose the bubble you talk a little bit about
the interview process and you go into the interview process here and here's a strategy on
on you go a bunch of stuff I'm gonna skip to one part for guidance on strategy look to special
operations murder boards murder boards are not quite as terrifying as they sound they are full
of pressure but professionally run and operators sits on one side of the table and on the other side
is a psychologist and five to eight senior enlisted and officers representing the entire community
the psychologist has previously assessed the operator to identify potential red flags
the senior panel then digs in raising the pressure by probing the red flags and presenting
complex scenarios they ask difficult questions and push against sore spots to see how the
operator reacts if you approach your interviews a little more like a soft murder board you can
reveal valuable information to that end we have five tips number one know what you're looking for
with each question number two create a core set of questions to be used with each candidate number three
ask scenario based and behavioral questions number four add challenges number five push candidates
outside their comfort zone gotta be careful on the legal side of this huh George you did you do
and and that's where you know that training comes in that we talked about earlier you people
have to understand you know hiring decisions there's a lot of law around it and so you want to
train those people effectively but you can create an enormous amount of pressure on somebody by
asking them difficult questions and you know it's funny when we're when when we're teaching
veteran candidates do you the number one candidate or the number one question that stumps people
executives and military people alike I'll just ask a simple question tell me about your leadership
style and people think from muscle memory they have muscle memory they oh I should be able to answer
this and they go on and on and on and on and on I get that with the exact I get that with veterans
but push people to to describe themselves put them in uncomfortable situations talk about failures
tell me about a time that you failed and there's several executives that if you can't talk about
how you failed and failed miserably and got back up and what you learned from it that's a person
you need to avoid but yeah there's there's a lot of law around it but if you know what you're looking
for with each question you plan your questions you plan your inner you know your interviewing
panel your murder board you can create a lot of pressure but mind you there's a balance too
because you you don't want to make it like the military version of it because candidates go okay
I'm not working there but there's you can carve a simple balance where they know they're
going to be tested in your environment and those people that know they're going to be tested in
your environment the right people are going to be drawn to your environment because of that test
any any person who's of talent that's worth their salt that comes to an easy interview process
and rocks it in the back of their head when they walk out the doors are going okay that was a little
bit easy and so now they're starting to think about okay that's that was a little too easy
but a person with true talent that wants to be challenged it wants to be valued and you know
working in an environment where there's the grind in the drive that tough process they're going to
go okay I'm ready for this bring it let's go let's do this and you find out a lot by putting
people under pressure in that scenario and let's dispel the notion that you know we call it a murder
board and you've you've been on them people aren't y'all in edge yeah and I'm just out of that
and and they're looking if you've given the answer they whether they like it or not they're
they're going to dig a little in a very professional manner and and some murder boards go
quickly because they identify that this person's humble and they're admitting you know past mistakes
and that they learn from it and that they're they're still working progress and improving
and there's murder boards go quickly it's the others where somebody comes in they're overly confident
they're arrogant and so that's where people that are trained to assess those behaviors and this
is one big behavioral interview this is the military's version of a behavioral interview those go
very long and it it almost becomes like a confessional they just they just keep digging themselves
now another tactic to that is after you put the person through a murder board it's like one
person goes out and say hey what how'd you feel about that process what what do you think you
can do better what areas didn't you expand upon to see now if they can do a what do we call
a brutally honest self assessment like hey you know what man I wish I could do that again
I missed this this I didn't reinforce this point and so if that person's training they come back in
and say hey real real self reflective after action that they just gave and one of the reasons
that we put this specific technique in there is because most interviews and companies are done
on a one-to-one basis and Jocco echo I bet I you could I could put you in one of these murder
boards and you could watch three other people ask questions and they'll have their opinions
but just in the observation mode that is of tremendous value just to watch people how they answer
how they act how they think how they reasoned through a particular scenario how they explain
their problem solving methodology so so many interviews due to the firefighting and the time and you
know that this is reactionary they don't put the time into it they don't put people in a room and go
okay this was my impression of the answer to the question this is how I think they'll work or
succeed or fail or struggle in this particular environment you can get actually a lot out of
observation which is why we put this in the book to give an example of what are on those murder
boards and you probably remember this one is they're they're gonna ask you an ethical question
you're dealing with a boss who does something highly unethical you know what actions do you take
and the response is going to tell you a lot about the person yeah yeah and you guys do a great
job of kind of laying all the stuff out from how to observe them to do a role plays with them
sent case case studies and scenarios you've got all that stuff in here observation what to look for
how to look for it different situations you can look for it and I mean it's just it's just a very
thorough chapter and then you get into assessment tests and you talk about you know the IQ test
at the army used and just the different assessment tests that get used now so that's all good
and one of those tests you comment on here one company we work with that yeah
if Overwatch using aptitude motivation and personality assessment to weed out candidates are
veterans despite being high performers we're all scoring very low on the test and thus being
eliminated from the hiring process curious might took the test for himself his score just 57% of
failing grade so what was up with that test so your assessment test naturally had bias
built in by whoever designed that test and there was a bias against you know I'm not saying in the
native light veterans are very different from the demographic that test was based around
the bottom line we're trying to say here's the assessments are good it's another layer to the
process that you use to select people especially if you have talent profiles and when you do these
talent profiles to identify your high performers you also want to do that against your low performers
to see if the assessment test is actually accurate because if your high performers know performers
in the same role or generally getting the same results that got a assessment test is most likely
not relevant or added value to that process is it yeah is it measuring what you want it to measure
right is it determining the success factors and one of the challenges with companies is that and
this is just you know kind of that that inside the talent acquisition function and talent management
function people will buy and enterprise wide solution and apply that test across the board
and just say okay this test applies to everybody and in my particular case it's screening
out veterans and we're able to look at that and go every yes something's wrong but it's hard to
persuade people that you know something they've invested a good amount of money in is not showing
them what it should show them I mean they're very wedded to their solution they're they're bought
in and it's hard to move them off the mark but Mike was an exceptional example of where people are
using something that's not showing success factors that you want it to be showing you it's another
data point yeah which so we do see companies that use these personality assessments as a
either no go or go criteria and I would caution people not to do that you talked about not being
a rules follower funny enough we had a company that recently assessed one of our people and you know
I won't say what's physical organization this person works for but he's with a very unique
or organization and he's been in that seat for five years which is an indicator that this guy is
is a high performing individual ethical absolutely and when he took this test the company came back
and said this guy's not you know it shows that he doesn't follow rules and we sort of had to
explain the context of the role he was in and say he finds a way to win and that may be why
he's not testing well in that one criteria on that assessment so you've got to be cautious even
like Josh cotton Dr. Cotton that does this for a living what will caution you
with regards to results on assessments he said you got to take it with a grain of salt
and some people to use a phrase that that you know I remember hearing it muster actually
assessment tests are not inoculations they don't insulate you from making a bad hire they don't
inoculate you from you know all the risk in the world you need to use them as my says they're
just one more data point but they it all begins and ends with knowing what success looks like
for a particular role and that requires thought it requires you know planning and and mapping that
out how you're going to go do it like I said you got that chapter locked in the next chapter
goes into the fact that you can't hire or fire your way to success talent acquisition is only
one part of a two variable equation for success talent plus leadership equals victory
and then there's a story in here about Mike and a little task unit that you were in called task unit
Charlie and what's interesting about task unit Charlie so task unit bruiser and task unit Charlie
and task unit alpha we're all at seal team three and every one of those task units had
some great guys and you know if you put the bell curve on all of them they'd all be
relatively the same group of you know seals you know couple low guys couple high guys
bunch of guys in the middle just just kind of typical nothing good or bad just typical
but it didn't really work out that way from a leadership perspective no it did not so pulled
from the same talent pull away like you said the talent profile for both the task units was the
exact same and this is where you know we caution people in the you know this is why we end
the book with this chapter is you had two groups where the resources the talent everything was
predominantly the same same budgets same weapon systems same people really and one rise raised to
the occasion and one fell below the standard in the seal teams and was toxic and the final determination
was leadership so bad leadership can poison any talent pull of exceptional people it just can't
and in that I'm so fortunate I got to observe that at a young tenure in my career and what I
benefited to is you know I got plucked out of that task unit but you're task unit and it talks
about how I wasn't the root of the problem but the person that was the root of the problem
I basically threatened because I have an allergic reaction to people that are just selfish
and all about themselves and this individual wasn't he he wasn't to solely blame but he was the
impetus of the the problem and so I came I guess with warnings when they sent me over to you and
then all the sudden I started prosper and I've become your operations officer I was your assistant
operations officer you put me in charge of operations officer you that was a motive and then you promoted
me two months later to Delta between a.o.i.c. you know the funny thing is a lot of the guys the
deployment after that were sestone took basically task unit bruiser back to Iraq we ended up in the
battle of southern city a majority of the guys in that troop were from task unit Charlie so again
you put them under a great litter and they did exceptional things so that's why we say you can no longer
well you know you can't fire or hire fire your way to success ultimately you have to lead and you
have to develop your people and that's what this chapter is about yeah we we kind of brought it around
to you know as we mentioned earlier in the book you have to treat your human capital as importantly
or as important as your financial capital and this was a way to kind of close that out to say
the journey doesn't end when you hire a players you get this whole process right that's not the
end of it you're not done and we did this ill video clip and we call it the talent war
the interesting thing about this title is and and we went into this in the video is that war doesn't end
it's continuous you're gonna win some battles but there's no point in this even if you read this
book if you do everything in this book and Mike and I are working with you and everything goes perfectly
you don't get to declare victory people grow people change products change the environment changes
people move on you have to keep after this this is a discipline that you need to bring to your company
and when you do you will have a competitive advantage it's the path it's part of the path
back to the book far too often a company will hire talented candidate a talented candidate who's
performance ends up being lackluster the company chalks up to a bad hire fires the person
starts all over again a costly assumption there are many reasons someone might not be performing as you expect
and only one of them is a bad hire chances are if a talented individual is not performing to standard
it's not their fault it's yours a little extreme ownership coming at you live
public talent work talent development you guys talk about training mentoring and coaching
good quote and hear from Jonah Pinto from 711 CEO most important thing in any organization is leadership
it's always leadership first because leaders find a way to get things done
once again something up a great attitude and and for the listeners to open to is actually a
west point the military academy graduate he served as a army officer before he entered the
the corporate world leadership is the most critical determinant of achieving victory for business
leaders are the ones who drive change makes things happen so when working to transform high
potential high potentials into high performers it's critical to identify and develop future
leaders that's just the way it's got to be and then wrapping this up a little bit here
actually this I'll wrap this up right here with this like it's not quite the closer but it's close
a true talent mindset like I said this is kind of the underlying thread of the book
remember the most critical step in winning the war on talent is developing the talent mindset
the deep belief that human capital is the single most important competitive advantage your company
can have if you truly believe human capital is your greatest competitive advantage you won't
stop with a hiring process you will continue to invest in and develop your people creating an
unbroken chain of excellence that's what good leaders do that's how great organizations are formed
the training and leadership development opportunities you provide your employees reveal the
truth of your talent mindset you might be able to attract candidates with a talk of a talent mindset
but if you want them to stay you need to show your employees that you truly value talent
by helping them to grow into their potential starts with you if you demonstrate exemplary leadership
others will follow practice a talent mindset mentoring coach your key leaders put in the time and
effort to develop your people into something great and a great organization will emerge
so that's I mean then you you go on you have a good closing but you know that's it it's
recruiting selecting training mentorship putting the right people in the right places
think about that's what putting the right people in the right places all those things
are really one thing and that is leadership and this is how you build a team and leaders have
to understand the importance of that they have to understand the importance of building the correct team
so one thing that we're doing you know is obviously helping people build these teams with EFO
overwatch tell me a little bit about the process at EFO for watch to take and find the right people
bring them in and get them assigned to the right companies out there these and you know a lot of
people say hey you guys are veteran recruiting for I sort of actually push back I say no we are
our leadership talent acquisition firm we we only deal with military leaders and people naturally
put a rank on that oh senior enlisted or or officers you know it's all levels in the military
as long as they have the attributes we're looking for especially humility so the military leaders
come coming out of the military you have already been highly vetted and guess what they have
rep mutations and it's very easy for us to reach back into those communities and reach into the
seals and say hey does anyone know this chakra willing guy yeah I want your buds with them
solid another guy says I did two platoons with them you can not find a more reliable team or
any any individual and that's what we need to hear we are also putting them through multiple assessments
Josh's EPI we're going to start utilizing that as a basis for us plus we want to collect data
to see if we can start identifying the difference between high performers middle performers in
low performers and he's already started that that process and then really with with the candidate side
it's so simple it's very easy to identify the ones that are just you've got it and we're really
looking for the top 10 20% of every community in the military and those that don't fall into that
realm we still want to help them with training we're dedicated to our brothers and sisters in
our arms to make sure that they're they're successful we can't place every candidate you know
we just don't have enough job opportunities one day we will but if one thing for the military
leaders that come to us they go through some of the best training but they go through the extreme
ownership and what what we and we talked about this last night the reason I love extreme ownership
is I've never seen two people you in life create a leadership system that is so simple because
if you go ask the Air Force army the Navy the Marine Corps they're all they're all going to give
you different answers on what attributes are important and what are the the primary principles
of leadership they're all saying the same thing but it's not codified so what extreme ownership and
even for the candidates reading the book is what we tell them is hey in the interview process you
have to tell story why we love extreme ownership so much is not only is it going to help you
contextualize your leadership experience and that's what they need help with some of these leaders
coming out special operations leaders who have been serving for 20 years leading is muscle memory
to them now and that's why if you ask them the question tells about your leadership style some
struggle through it but when we teach them the context of extreme ownership they start to
get their story and the way you guys wrote the book combat story principle business context
helps them to translate we all know the number one challenge for veterans trying to get jobs is
translating their experience extreme ownership sets them on the path to doing that in a good
manner then I handle that first part of them they get George and Carly Walden and
they put them through search training they prepare them for the interview process the feedback
we're getting from senior special operations leaders to other military leaders is this is the
best advice I've ever gotten from taps and all these other programs that we go through we don't
sugarcoat anything we give them the reality of the situation and we're very straightforward that
it's on you we can't step into the interview with you it is on you to convey your value to the
organization and get them to say yes they want to say yes that's the military leader side
and talk about rewarding work not only do we do we we we make a you know a good paycheck from from
this mine of work it's also the emotional return on investment from senior in our former
brothers and sisters step into senior management positions and then crush it that's feedback we get
from business leaders best higher I've I've ever made on the the client side we screen our clients
is diligently as we screen our candidates and this has been a learning process we've had to learn
this through scars and it comes down to I need the clients to commit and I need to hear that they
have a foundation of belief that leadership is wildly and infinitely more important than in
street experience if we hear that from the clients we believe they truly understand that then that's a
client we're most likely going to work with but if we get a client we've had this like hey listen
I need a leader right now to step into this role I don't want to have to train them I don't want
to have to build a relationship with them literally said this I just need them to do their job
and it was a lucrative role we said hey we're not the best fit because we know that that
relationship is just going to end poorly so also clients come to us and they say we need to
fill in 20 days they've already compromised the process and we're not going to do that so we're very
prideful on the white love service that we provide and if we don't have many misses at all but if we
find out a candidate it didn't work it is like a get punch it is like our reputation has been
marked and that we take it very seriously and I think that's what you know sort of
differentiates us from from a lot of the executive search firms out there is I know we together
in George we're going to build this into the number one leadership town acquisition firm in the
nation I have no doubt then when people look for directors of leadership in training as well as
chief leadership officers they're going to say go to you if overwatch because the men and women
were placing know how to train people they know how to create the foundation for strong
cultures and that's really where we're making the name right now we'll still place people in the
COO roles general management roles but one of my passions for you if overwatch is that that
director of leadership in training or the COO position yeah you know just to be completely
transparent to be in talent acquisition you have to have a pretty strong mass acoustic gene
about you because it's a brutal a brutal job function but I've been helping veterans for over 20
years and where it started was I want to be able to give to our brothers and sisters and arms of
things that I didn't have when I transitioned out in the 90s and what they didn't have was
actionable information and we deal once we go through selection kind of assessment and finding
that right candidate with all those attributes they're still this bridge between the ideal
opportunity for that veteran leader for that senior leader and that position it's called the
interview and that is very very difficult for veterans to cross that divide to be able to articulate
clearly and then a crisp professional impactful manner in the interview that you're going to be able
to over deliver in that particular role so it isn't just you know we're doing all facets of it and
I think that's what makes the dynamic between me and Mike and our team so well so good so solid and so
different is that you have 20 years of selection and assessment we both been in leadership roles I've
been in the executive roles and we're bringing actionable information to top military leaders
so that they are ready for that transition into corporate America and when you put that person
in that position it gets more veteran hiring and so we have to get it right with the company
we have to get it right with the veteran and and there's some veterans that we we're not going
to place but we're absolutely agnostic if they come to us we're going to help but crossing that bridge
screening our our candidates screening our clients we are very meticulous about how we go about
doing that yeah I think talking to some of the clients of people that we've placed and just
awesome to hear everything that you guys are talking about it's like it's like with extreme
ownership we go and work with the company and we check back in with them three months later and
they're like oh yeah this is working this is awesome and it's the same thing we're getting back
you know when I hear from clients you know this is the best hire we've had oh yeah we we were worried
and now we're promoting I think it's just like a totally it as we often say it works this stuff works
and you take these individuals and I know Mike you and I've been talking about this and I know it's a
little bit hard to do but we're some of the guys that we've placed we're going to get them on the podcast
so they can talk about not just their military experience but then what it was like going through
we if Overwatch and now what it's like entering this civilian world you know we're letting them get
settled in a little bit before we get them back to fly out to California and do this but I think
it'll be awesome for people to start to hear those stories and get that feedback
when people want to engage you if Overwatch towards the process so they can go to the website
efoverwatch.com another thing we we do with companies is we are here as a talent advisory
we can come in and basically set the foundation based off the playbook we've provided so you have
a hiring process from which to grow and that's probably the greatest service we can provide
beyond just finding the right leaders for your organization that's critical there's a lot of
times a George will actually have to ask the client do you have interview questions what
your process can I send you something to help you make the selection of the leaders we present
and that's more often than that that talent advisory piece is is key but but if I'm just
company out there that wants to hire so I go to efoverwatch.com I fill out the various information
and then we're going to set up a call and you're going to talk with Mike he'll talk to
myself you may talk with one other person and we're going to really kind of dig in with you as to
okay let's talk about your company what is your position in the market what are you trying to
accomplish where are you trying to grow what are your leadership gaps what are your individual
contributor gaps you know we want to know both of those things you know what are those things that
are keeping you up at night and then let's talk about how talent and leadership solves those problems
and are you committed to leadership is the most important thing in your business and you know we'll
also walk through to find out the maturity of their hiring process and how they've done it because
you know we we want to make sure that they know how to do because they're mechanics behind this
as well we've helped with offer letters I've helped with compensation you know structuring complex
offers which which is not easy for small and medium business to do a lot of times they just don't
have that expertise so we will sit down and spend a good hour hour and a half with them you know
diagnosing you know why did they come to us what is it that they need what can we solve for them
and should we be working together and I'm sorry miss I'm sorry so the the question jocca
absolutely it's going to be a series of phone calls we want to know everything about your business
about your industry and a lot of times the reason we do these phone calls because what business
the leaders think they want is not necessarily what they need and our our job as well during
that is to advise them based off what we're hearing what we think you really need is x, y, z,
not a, b, c and our clients have followed our advice and it's worked out beautifully
what you know we're in that advice is coming from nothing but scars and failures especially
with 20 years of talent acquisition between him and uh currently so we we want a very very strong
relationship with our clients if they sign the contract beyond that then it gets into the talent
sink for what what what a talent sink is for us is we're going to spec out what that position is
and what are the attributes they're truly looking for from there we we tell him hey we're going to
need usually two to three weeks to start screaming and assessing potential leaders the the people
the the right leaders for this position it could be through our organic town pool we're also
going to run an external search for people we haven't touched yet that maybe out there that may be a
good fit for that role and that takes time and our clients again we're preaching patience
we have a pretty darn good fill speed rate to fill and if people allow us to go through our process
it usually very statistically it works out and they're very good pairing yeah well it's
like what we do methodical and you know we saw say all the time at S. L. Front what we do is we
solve problems through leadership and what better way to solve a problem through leadership than to
actually give a person give a give a company a leader that understands these principles that knows
how to lead that knows how to step in and make things happen so that's been awesome you have
over watch dot com I can't we've been going for almost three and a half hours but I real quick
you have battlefield we just kind of ran our first pilot program and to tell us about that a little bit
so this besides let me interject that was freaking awesome you weren't a believer first is that
accurate or that's completely inaccurate I don't know where where why do you think that we
late when I thought we're like oh juckers not necessarily believe we're he has to see the concept
personally I 100% of a believer that was a thousand percent I mean you know if you think about what
I do in this podcast I take I take battlefield strolls through books so for me to go out and walk
battlefields is to me I would do nothing but that that would be my whole life if I was telling
you I I got offered a show in Europe to like go and walk battlefields and talk the stories and I just
couldn't do it it was multiple months of filming and I just it's not happening you know I just can't do it
but at some point in my life I wouldn't be surprised so yeah I don't know where that idea came from
that is a data-centric lack of relationship with no-one or boss yeah it's actually kind of crazy to think that
me that me even with my whole life would not want to go out and walk on bat sacred hollowed
battlefields and talk about leadership that's yeah so I'm 100% on board and I always have been from
day one so so where this came from is in 2012 no yeah 2012 with one of my seal squadrons
the commanding officer especially the timing was not good we were one month away from going to
Afghanistan and and I'm the operations officer and of course you know the task list of what you
need to get done before you deploy is pretty deep as an operations officer and I I sort of tried
to reason with him I hate timing is not good any heard me out and he said my guess what what we're
going out there leadership development is not optional it's mandatory and so we went out to
get his bird and of course I'm pouty you know I'm doing my quiet sort of pouty I'm there and as we
started to walk the different stands the two day walk of get his bird you started to realize that
the commanders both Confederate Union forces faced the same dilemmas same human dilemmas and
human problems that we faced in Afghanistan I rack another regions of the world what makes and we
call this in the military we call these staff rights it is a technique we utilize to develop our
people again looking at past examples of commanders humans that made both great decisions and bad
decisions in learning from their mistakes and their successes to make you a better leader
when you walk and people may say well you know the civil wars drastically different than I
rack or Afghanistan technology no the problems they face transcend geography they transcend technology
they transcend time and this is why a lot of businesses do these staff rights we call it you
have battlefield but what I think we do better than any just sort of history and that takes people out there
is we tie extreme ownership into it and on this first one the pilot we brought 20 of our clients out
and I don't know about you I mean they probably don't call you because they don't have your phone number
but I've been getting text messages from CE the CEOs that route there that this was one of the
most valuable leadership development trips they've ever taken or you could see it on their face
this is in the first hour you could see it on their faces they're looking they're taking notes they're
talking to each other yeah it was just extremely impactful and you know it was a pilot and we're
going to start spinning those things up yeah if you will keep you posted we'll keep you posted
and I mean there's going to be limited seats I mean that's just the way it is it's going to be
small groups but who knows it's freaking it's just an unbelievable way to learn and an unbelievable
way to develop and an unbelievable way to increase your understanding not just of history not just
of leadership but of human nature to go out there and see what has happened in our past so it's
freaking awesome a lot of stuff going on man we do so the book comes out when November 10th so it's
up on Amazon right now the town or it's right now we just have the ebook the Kindle version the
paperback will be up momentarily it's in the Amazon right now then the hardback will follow that
naughty a book ultimately though the book launches November 10th which if I need to educate you
you know November 10th is you don't need that to give me a bro the Marine Corp birthday no coincidence
George any any closing comments here you know this is it's been an interesting journey to
write this book and it's it's it's very serendipitous to find somebody who has the same passion
for talent that I have and and so you know I hope that Mike and I got the best out of each other in this
book push each other and really proud of what we've delivered here because ultimately it's about
helping companies just get better and win and and and I'd like to think we did a pretty good job of
of giving them a good roadmap the talent is the most critical thing that you can focus on
any closing thoughts Mike no check we're trying to get better we're trying to build a better team
echo Charles this any recommendations on how we can get better interesting thing about
what we've been talking about is like yeah you guys talk about you know these are things
to to look for you know and as far as hiring and stuff but on the other side of the coin like if
you're looking at get hired hired it's like a good information resource to be like okay that's
what I'm gonna strive for you know very interesting anyway it's for striving for stuff
stop about Jaco feel for striving really transition well yeah so Jaco feel how should I say
assortment supplementation items the ones that stay on my mind which I noticed like I don't
so much think that much about milk really yeah that's interesting you must be not not wanting to
bit be stronger well here's the things not that I don't take milk all the time I don't think about
it all the time but I do think about joint warfare krill oil and vitamin D for some reason I
don't know why I feel like because it's like an everyday maintenance thing and when I stop
taking it that's when I pay the price harsh here's my question to you yes do you know what that
price is like have you felt it because you don't really go after it or I don't I don't go off
it yeah so I don't know the price yeah I do yeah so basically like you know like okay all right
let me turn my attention over here so you know like sometimes like you okay maybe you're feeling
weak or whatever right but as far as your joint skill you can feel strong but your joints are like
jammed up that's almost in a way worse than being weak because if you're weak you're like oh
maybe any eat good maybe whatever but if you're joint it's like it's a it's a different issue
seems saying is a good news get back on the joint warfare get back on the krill oil you just
feel all that stuff just flying back into your joints then you're back in the game then we start
feeling good about it real good by the way so and I know this too because I have gone off it
and gotten on few times and yeah so I know the price and I know the benefit do you are you able
to make these assessments because you're a doctor no okay well my my explanation of the joint
warfare in krill oil flying back into your joints was we'll say a little bit short of a medical
explanation as far as how I'm not a doctor either yes I know that but I've done also of a very
intense medical assessment of of vitamin B3 and cold war and here's the assessment
I've traveled all over the place I've shaken hands with a bunch of people I have not had this
disease called COVID for some reason could that reason be right okay that reason be
because I'm on the D3 and the cold war no I'm not saying it is because I'm not a doctor
no but you know you know there's there is such thing as coincidence then there's such thing as
correlation and then there's such thing as causation you seem saying the three levels
hey that's it we'll leave it at that how about that cool safe right yeah just saying we're talking
earlier about you can only ask certain questions in the interview or not so much you can only ask
you can't ask certain questions that's very correct actually to deviate from the the
Jockel field thing for a second isn't it a lot of the times the case where the interviewer
is kind of in a way like wanting to bond with a person just on a maybe on just a small level like
hey oh wins the baby do yeah and it's like oh I jam that up like I really like you know it's like it's
not like they're trying to like enforce powers something like this no I mean the best
interviewers are always trying to build a relationship because one of the critical things you
want to get out of people is authenticity yeah that's one of the biggest things and the best
way you do that is by building a relationship and to your point that person may come in they may
not come into your company so yeah they do and most of those things are done with malice they
have an accidentally but you know in today's litigious society even accidental scary that will get
yeah and see that's why it's so like yeah like scary for real scary because it's like man
it's one thing to be like hey that was a dick move for me to do that so I'm not going to do that
anymore you know well how about I just not be a dick in the interview oh problem solved right
here's the thing problem's not solved because you're getting sued yeah because I can be well in that
case yes but as far as from a learning perspective or from just a general functioning perspective
now I'm be like how about that so I'm gonna be real nice how about that I'm gonna bond with this guy
mean what you're like you know lying what you call minefield landline field one of those
you're walking on eggshells and whatnot yeah which kind of isn't a very good bonding approach yeah
you're walking on eggshells yeah then you you kind of get you know your seaming personal your
risk of vests you know so you know as we teach veterans any good interview is simply a
conversation it's ultimately what it comes down to and you know when we work with veterans it's just
hey man be yourself be authentic you know but put it in a vernacular of extreme ownership and talk
about how great of a leader you are just have a conversation and that's it's simple not easy
and I love that phrase late later to laws are not always a good thing not all of them are great
and that's a profession in itself yeah yeah it's just part of my profession is you know that
training you know ultimately training keeps people safe right that's what it does yeah that's one of
those situations where you can be mad about it you might not like a particular law but it's
the law and you got to you got to just deal with it that's just the way it is so you never know
people could be made it can claims like medical claims about things about supplements and you could
run into all kinds of legal problems you which he just did there but hey if you're waging war on
colds various sickness illnesses viruses etc you don't know to name any is there a metal
quote is that a medical claim real easy maybe not unless these are the things that you do want
to follow so what's that called like a caveat or no it's not a caveat is it caveat yeah like
a dislike yeah just here's my disclaimer I'm not a doctor yeah so don't listen to me yes
well or just listen you know yeah how about this listen to joc what about that okay we'll go with it
we'll stick with that the mind that I'm not a doctor yeah Johnny Kim doctor
joc go on no doctor keep these all these things in mind no last yeah vitamin vitamin D daily
daily man these are things that you know again to stay on your mind I'm not saying don't keep
milk on your mind I'm not saying that I'm saying me personally in my experience D3 joint warfare
or not whatever these are the things that okay we have these two-pronged effect let me move my
attention over here to my pros so you have long term you have short term right and every once
a while you'll get a golden nugget that's both that's what milk is seem saying a lot of these
health foods they don't have the immediate gratification as heavy as a lot of these unhealthy
things I see them saying I do sure milk is one of those rare golden nuggets the other one is
sushi my opinion but back to milk it's dessert in the form of health food or protein health food
in the form of a dessert boom either way you're good there you go either way it's true also discipline
multiple forms multiple forms there's your intrinsic discipline that you go through life with that
comes from within you know they're not talking about that one right I'm talking about this
implementation so yes okay what is it what is the three forms you got the powder that's a good one
that's a good pre workout one I like this first pre workout like I dig a like a pre life
yeah by the way it was so hot this weekend out here with you have your intensive soap I know
it's hot there but I mixed up the jockel pomer in the big iced tea like pitcher with ice in it
cooked those are you out yeah you go feel
also the the cans okay here's what the cans are really really
it's a health brain health drink right so it doesn't sound glamorous right think of it it's a
brain and body health drink okay in the form of a delicious refreshing beverage
beverage you want to say different times I was gonna say energy drink but then then you got all the
what you call the what you call it when you have a reputation a word has a reputation
a freaking stigma has a stigma you seem saying anyway that's what it is so the can is also
this window okay look we don't want to drink the can we don't want to mix up powders okay I get it
pop up pill that even has a stigma nonetheless this one's a good way of popping good pills capsules
technically you know all these forms depending on your lifestyle depending on what you're doing
that day they can you know at least one's gonna work for you I think my experience that's how it is
also we got work your kid milk we got chocolate tea and all the stuff is available at the
vitamin shop we also got if you're gonna get into jjitsu which you might you probably should
good origin main dot com get yourself a geek get yourself a rash card get yourself things that you
you can wear when you're not on the jjitsu math's of justice because despite our best efforts
we're not always training jjitsu sometimes you have to have other parts of your life that's why
we make jeans that's why we make boots that's why we make t-shirts whatever a bunch of different
clothing items all that stuff and the supplements available at origin main dot com also we have a
store jjocco has a store it's called jocco store anyway some good developments and improvements on
there for those of us that browse jocco store for those of us that are seeking praise for our efforts
I'm not even saying I'm doing it I'm just saying the store is that becoming more and more developed
in one person's opinion and I think it's an what he call it an objective
all right we'll go anyway jocco store dot com go there if you appreciate the developments
if you appreciate beautiful web design yeah exactly yeah if you go check out web design
web design yeah well actually technically I didn't really design it you know I got a finger in the pot
nonetheless as far as these angles nonetheless we supply provide really clothing item that you can
wear to represent while you're on this path that we're on this path that's not easy by the way I don't
know if you guys know this or not my can George it's hard it's full of pitfalls temptation traps
wise men once told me that unless when you're on the path you want to represent jocco store dot
com and that hoodies shirts hats beanie's shorts board shorts
at some point the shirts are these week the here's the thing they're not up okay
but they will prove that they're quite hard and they're not the best it's a process you know
well what it would it would it would it would make say Mike said something the methodology it's a process
of all the process trust the process is one of our things anyway quite that okay
quick to create that into the whole deal and boom you got it anyway yes joccal store the three
if you want something also we got a podcast record subscribe to this podcast because
echo thinks that you're not going to we also have joccal unraveling which has been on this
feed it's going to soon be on its own feed joccal unraveling podcasts it's myself a darelecoop
but that was the thread we had to change the name because I was getting sued again which is always
fun so that's why it's called joccal unraveling because I own my own name jocco so I can pretty
much put that on anything and no one can bother me about it grounded podcast we haven't done
the while maybe record one more this week we have an opportunity warrior kid podcasts as well
for those little kids out there and if you got little kids or even if you're a grown human
and I need some soap go to irishokranch.com where young aiden the warrior kid is making soap
there's a no one out one or the warrior kids still you made warrior kid so like actual
so not just you as an adult but also your children you too we have a youtube channel
where echo makes videos and if it's a form in a video he puts a bunch of explosions in it
and if it's a for our video then it's just nothing because that's the way he operates
different purposes videos yeah it's cool all right okay we're we're talking about
effective hiring processes leadership right Mike Shirley George should we put explosions
smoke and fire in this video occasionally in this in this video that we do that we're doing
right so it's making at some point when you're talking about something it would it not be
a good thing to have maybe a black off helicopter fly overhead or a minigun open up
or an explosion happened in the background echo I'm gonna back you up on this you know you
ask anyone on the ear for watch team and say what don't I do they say we don't do cute so
I'm not talking cute bro I'm talking minigun I'd be over the top I think you're hitting
down the right I think you're right but here's the thing and this is for real if I'm like hey
if I get moved inspired and I got my notes here I don't have my note here also you're you're
starting to take it under consideration no I'm saying I'm explaining I have my notes here
and maybe I was moved by something George or Mike said right I have my note to be like okay look
if I could isolate what they said and try my best to capture the feeling that I got when you said
it maybe put my can cut that up into a little video that might involve explosions the
effects me too much like a certain financial uh tv host mad money oh yeah this is get
a lot of the money yeah yeah yeah good good comparison I think it's my opinion anyway yes
some videos have explosions a shorter ones whatever and the video version of this podcast
but we're keeping it wrong I don't even add color and you want me to add a mini gun opening
up I don't know probably not I don't know though I could be wrong anyway also psychological
warfare if you didn't know what that is that's an album that joker recorded with tracks each track
has a purpose and it gets you past these moments a weakness on this path that we're on in the
event of you being on the path which of course we all are in the last hundred percent effective
on the one by the way so yeah you can get that amazon or like a google play anywhere where you can
buy mp3 if you want a visual version of the path go to flipside canvas dot com owned by my brother
decoda mire we he's putting this cool stuff on two things that you can hang on your wall
flipside canvas dot com also we got some books we got some books first book talent war
by my x-ray on George Randall step up get that we got the code we got leadership strategy
in tackies field manual way the warrior kid one two and three mic in the dragon says
this link was freedom field manual and extreme ownership and the economy of leadership if you like
what we're talking about here check out some of those books books we got us on front leadership
consultancy and what we do is solve problems through leadership go to ashlan front dot com
if you need help inside your organization aligning your leadership getting everyone on the same
plan and rolling the boat in the same direction so that you can win ashlan front dot com we also have
an online version of leadership training look you don't learn leadership in one day in one hour
in one week in one month it's something you constantly have to check yourself on go to
efo line dot com we totally revamped it we're doing live stuff all the time if you want to ask
me a question if you want to ask me a question you can go to efo line dot com and i will be there
at certain times and you can sit there and ask me a question get feedback havoc conversation
with me with the rest of the ashlan front team that's what we're doing so come and check that out
and we got the muster the phoenix muster has been canceled the Orlando muster was canceled
the next muster is Dallas Texas December 3rd and 4th go to extremownership dot com for details
and listen we're probably going to have to do some kind of social distancing so that means less
seats we've got people that were scheduled for Orlando and were scheduled for phoenix who have now
opted to come to Dallas I don't think we're sold out yet but it's gonna sell out quick just because
of those factors so if you want to come extremownership dot com going register and we've been talking
about efo Overwatch all day today all all this past almost four hours this is what we do
efo Overwatch dot com if you're a company out there and you need leaders which by the way let me tell
you something you do need leaders get experienced leaders from the military that understand the principles
that we talk about and you can plug them into your organization so that your organization can go to
the next level what did I miss fellas that's it spot on i mean it's a game changer
talent plus leadership equals victory get on board the train america's mighty warriors dot org
that's momma lee marklies mom she has dedicated her life after losing mark two helping
service members their families gold star families around the world if you want to donate or you
want to get involved go to america's mighty warriors dot org and if you have too much time on your
hand and you just want to hear a few more of my monotonous monowogs or maybe you think you need just a
little bit more of echoes exasperated explanations then you can find us on the interwebs on twitter
instagram facebook echo is adacotrails i am at jocca winlink mike's arelly is mj sereli on twitter
and mr dot sereli on instagram and facebook michael sereli jorts what's your social media g random
g dot randle is at instagram that's the gram echo calls at the gram the gram and for all things
echelon front on social media it's at echelon front and then for ef overwatch at ef overwatch
and on the interwebs we can be found at echelon front dot com but also ef overwatch dot com
and thanks again guys for coming on been awesome thanks for your service to the country
thank you and you know when you're you know we always feel like when our service is over in the
military we want to serve more and what you guys are doing right now to help veterans transition
out of the military getting the civilian sector and get on their next mission you've heard
me say to thousand times veterans need a new mission when they leave that mission that they've
dedicated their life to they get out they need a new mission they're looking for a new mission
you guys are doing a great job providing that mission form so thank you for that and to all
the veterans and all the active duty troops that are out there on the front lines now or of held
the line in the past thank you for protecting all ability to pursue life liberty and the pursuit
of happiness and to police and law enforcement and firefighters and paramedics and EMTs and dispatchers
and correctional officers and board of patrol and secret service and all the other first responders
thank you for protecting us when evil closes in and everyone else out there making things happen
is hard accomplishing your mission is hard life is hard but you don't have to do it alone
build yourself a team surround yourself with talent and then go out there and get after it
and until next time this is Mike and George and Echo and Jocco out